---
date:
    created: 2025-07-03
links:
    - Theme 1: https://sa2025.iavceivolcano.org/theme-1/
categories:
    - Theme 1
    - Session 1.1
slug: 1-1-13
---

# Insights into the Magmatic Plumbing System of Pavlof Volcano, Alaska through Volatiles in Olivine-Hosted Melt Inclusions

**^^Valerie K. Wasser^^  ^1^, Taryn M. Lopez ^1^, Jessica F. Larsen ^1^, Pavel E. Izbekov ^1^, Matthew Loewen ^2^, Christopher Waythomas ^2^, Megan E. Newcombe ^3^, Kayla Iacovino ^4^ **

<!-- more -->> - **Affiliations:** ^1^ University of Alaska Fairbanks, Geophysical Institute, Alaska Volcano Observatory, Fairbanks,  Alaska; ^2^ USGS Alaska Volcano Observatory, Anchorage, Alaska; ^3^ University of Maryland, College Park, Maryland; ^4^Jacobs--NASA Johnson Space Center, Houston, Texas 

> - **Presentation type:** Poster

> - **Presentation time:** Thursday, 16:30 - 18:30, Poster Hall

> - **Poster Board Number:** [227](../../map_poster_boards.md#thursday)

> - **Programme No:** 1.1.13

--- 

**Abstract**

Pavlof Volcano, Alaska, USA, is a frequently active, basaltic-andesite stratovolcano that typically erupts with limited or no recognized precursory signals. Previous studies have found little evidence to support the presence of a persistent shallow magma reservoir, but barometry studies have been limited. Here we investigate Pavlof Volcano's magma system using volatile concentrations in olivine-hosted melt inclusions from two prehistoric eruptions. Results from Fourier-transform infrared spectroscopy and electron microprobe analyses find that inclusions contain <0.5 to >5 wt% H~2~O (N=61), 400--2,800 ppm S (N=14), <30 ppm (~detection limit) to 700 ppm CO~2~ (N=61), and Fo=70--75 in the host olivine. CO~2~ in shrinkage bubbles of inclusions is accounted for with thermodynamic modeling in MIMiC. Analyses of sulfur Kα peak shifts suggest the system fO~2~ is ~NNO+0.5. H~2~O and CO~2~ volatile saturation pressures calculated with the MagmaSat model indicate equilibrium pressures ranging from <100 bar (<0.5 km) to 2500 bar (9 km). Degassing models show that no single degassing path from one initial volatile concentration can explain all the data. A possible explanation for the wide range of H~2~O concentrations and saturation pressures is that some magma stalled at a depth of several kilometers and experienced diffusive H~2~O-loss. Furthermore, while most CO~2~-rich melt inclusions follow closed-system degassing paths, a second population of inclusions with low CO~2~ is more consistent with open-system degassing paths and shallow entrapment, potentially indicating variability in degassing processes.  This study aims to provide new constraints on Pavlof's magma plumbing system to help inform future volcano monitoring efforts.

