---
date:
    created: 2025-07-03
links:
    - Theme 1: https://sa2025.iavceivolcano.org/theme-1/
categories:
    - Theme 1
    - Session 1.1
slug: 1-1-11
---

# Contribution of melt inclusions to the origin and evolution of the primitive magmas of Mount Cameroon volcano

**^^Pauline Wokwenmendam Nguet^1^^^ \, Legrand Joseph Tchop^1,2^, Benjamin Ntieche^3^, Mebara Francois^1^, Victor Metang^1^, Jacques Dili Rake^1^, Merlin Isidore Teitchou^1^, Jacqueline Vander Auwera^4^**

<!-- more -->> - **Affiliations:**  1. Institute for Geological and Mining Research / Centre for Geophysics and Volcanology Research, PO Box 370 Buea, Cameroon; 2. Department of Earth Sciences, Faculty of Sciences, University of Yaoundé I, PO Box 812 Yaoundé, Cameroon; 3. Higher Teacher Training College, University of Yaounde1 PO Box 812 Yaoundé, Cameroon; 4. Department de Geology, University of Liège B-4000 Sart-Tilman, Belgium. 

> - **Presentation type:** Poster

> - **Presentation time:** Thursday, 16:30 - 18:30, Poster Hall

> - **Poster Board Number:** [225](../../map_poster_boards.md#thursday)

> - **Programme No:** 1.1.11

--- 

**Abstract**

The Mont Cameroun volcano is fed by magmas that originate at depth from the partial melting of the lithospheric (or asthenospheric) mantle.  Before reaching the Earth's surface, magmas are transferred through a network of reservoirs. The analysis of the melt inclusions from Mount Cameroon has enabled to characterize primitive liquids in relation to the lavas. Melt inclusions are found in microdroplets trapped in the early minerals (olivines) from the pyroclastic products. The study of the major elements of magmatic inclusions, trapped in the most magnesian olivines (Mg#84-86) of Mount Cameroon revealed "primitive" basanite and alkaline basalt liquids of variable composition compared to the lavas. The study of these liquids revealed basanite and alkaline basalts of variable composition compared with the much more uniform basalts of the Mount Cameroon magmatic series.
The geochemistry of these trapped liquids shows that: - the original primitive lavas did not undergo the evolutionary process by FC, but rather fundamentally (or exclusively) underwent the process of partial melting; - variations in the trace element content of primitive liquids directly reflect a variation in the rate of partial melting of a homogeneous mantle source. The spectra of fluid inclusions show HIMU characteristics. The significance of HIMU signatures is more likely to be associated with mantle plumes geochemical signatures which provides evidence for deep mantle source for these geochemical domains. The "primitive" liquids and lavas of Mount Cameroon represent a co-genetic sequence formed by varying degrees of partial melting of their source. Geochemical signatures such as the very high La/Yb ratios of the Mount Cameroon melt inclusions (>20) characterize a garnet lherzolite source.
 
** Keywords**: Primitive magma, Partial melting, Fractional crystallization, Alkali basalt, Mount Cameroon active volcano.

