# A clinopyroxene-based approach to unravel temporal changes in magma plumbing beneath La Palma, Canary Islands

**Alberto Caracciolo^1^, Teresa Ubide^2^, Alvaro Marquez^3^, Diego González-García ^3^, Maria Jose Huertas^3^, Eumenio Ancochea^3^, Raquel Herrera^4^, Nicolás Chicharro^3^, Juan Jesús Coello-Bravo^4^, Diego Perugini^1^, Maurizio Petrelli^1^**

<!-- more -->> - **Affiliations:**  ^1^ University of Perugia, Department of Physics and Geology, Perugia, Italy ^2^The University of Queensland, School of the Environment, Brisbane, Australia. ^3^Universidad Complutense, Área de Petrología y Geoquímica, Madrid, Spain. ^4^Universidad Rey Juan Carlos, ESCET, Área de Geología, Tecvolrisk Research Group; Móstoles, Madrid, Spain. ^5^Fundación Telesforo Bravo - Juan Coello; Puerto de la Cruz, Tenerife, Spain. 

> - **Presentation type:** Poster

> - **Presentation time:** [Thursday 16:30 - 18:30](../sessions_comparison.md#__tabbed_3_6), [Room Poster Hall](../maps_venue.md#__tabbed_1_1)

> - **Poster Board Number:** [242](../map_poster_boards.md#thursday)

> - **Programme No:** 1.1.28

> - [Theme 1](../theme1.md) > [Session 1](../sessions/session-1-1.md)

--- 

:fontawesome-solid-book: **Abstract**

The architecture of magma plumbing systems may change over time, with significant implications for understanding volcanic behavior and improving monitoring efforts. This study focuses on clinopyroxene crystals to investigate the temporal evolution in historical times of the magma plumbing system beneath La Palma, in the Canary Islands. Samples from the 1712 El Charco eruption, the 1971 Teneguía eruption, and the 2021 Tajogaite eruption will be analysed using detailed in situ EMPA and LA-ICP-MS. These three eruptions are all characterized by the involvement of two distinct magmas: an amphibole- and pyroxene-dominated tephrite, and an olivine- and pyroxene-dominated basanite. Preliminary data on clinopyroxene cores from the 2021 Tajogaite eruption reveal three core populations, distinguished based on their textural and compositional characteristics. By characterizing the textural and geochemical characteristics of these eruptive products and using clinopyroxene-based thermobarometers, we aim to gain insights into the magmatic processes, storage conditions, and their temporal evolution underlying these eruptions.

