# Magma plumbing system of Kirishima volcano revealed by helium isotopic ratio of olivine and pyroxene phenocrysts

**^^Rai Yoneda^^ ^1^, Hirochika Sumino^2^, Masataka Kawaguchi^3^, Toshiaki Hasenaka^4^ , Yasuhisa Tajima^5^**

<!-- more -->> - **Affiliations:** ^1^Department of Chemistry, School of Science, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan; ^2^Research Center for Advanced Science and Technology, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan; ^3^Earthquake Research Institute, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan; ^4^Center for Water Cycle Marine Environment and Disaster Management, Kumamoto University, Kumamoto, Japan; ^5^Nippon Koei Co., Ltd. Tokyo, Japan

> - **Presentation type:** Poster

> - **Presentation time:** [Thursday 16:30 - 18:30](../sessions_comparison.md#__tabbed_3_6), [Room Poster Hall](../maps_venue.md#__tabbed_1_1)

> - **Poster Board Number:** [240](../map_poster_boards.md#thursday)

> - **Programme No:** 1.1.26

> - [Theme 1](../theme1.md) > [Session 1](../sessions/session-1-1.md)

--- 

:fontawesome-solid-book: **Abstract**

Noble gases are useful geochemical tracers for the origin of materials on and in the Earth. For example, since helium isotopic ratio, ^3^He/^4^He, is 1.4×10^-6^ ≡ 1 *R*~A~ in the atmosphere, while ^3^He/^4^He = 8 (±1) *R*~A~ in the convecting mantle, helium in fumaroles or hot springs is attracting attention as a monitoring tool for volcanic activity (*e.g.*,^1^). However, ^3^He/^4^He of melt inclusions in mafic phenocrysts, expected to reflect magma itself, is necessary for understanding a magma plumbing system.
In this study, the noble gas isotopic compositions of olivine and pyroxene phenocrysts from the Kirishima volcano group in Japan were measured. The ^3^He/^4^He of olivines in the pumice of the Shinmoe-dake 2011 eruption was 7.43 (±0.06) *R*~A~, while that of pyroxenes in the same pumice was 7.98 (±0.17) *R*~A~. Although the olivines and pyroxenes are considered to be crystallized in deep and shallow magma chambers, respectively^2,3^, ^3^He/^4^He indicate that melt inclusions in pyroxene have more mantle-like properties, which suggests the different crystallization timing. In addition, olivines in three lavas from Ohachi, erupted in 788, 1235, and 1350, respectively, had a high ^3^He/^4^He of ~8 *R*~A~ to reinforce that Ohachi lavas have a deeper origin^4^.
[1] Padrón, E. *et al.*, *Geology* **41**, 539-542 (2013). [2] Suzuki, Y. *et al.*, *JVGR* **257**, 184-204 (2013). [3] Aizawa, K. *et al.*, *JGR Solid Earth* **118**, 198-215 (2014). [4] Kagiyama, T. *et al.*, *Bull.* *Volcanol. Soc. Jpn.* **42**, S157-S165 (1997).

