# Magmatic Cl-H2O contents, fluid extraction and porphyry fertility: Evidence from zircon and its apatite inclusions

**Wenting Huang^1,3^, Madeleine C.S. Humphreys^2^, David J. Colby^2^, Xiaoping Xia^3^, and Huaying Liang^3^**

<!-- more -->> - **Affiliations:** ^1^School of Jewelry, City Polytechnic of Shenzhen, Shenzhen, China. ^2^Department of Earth Sciences, Durham University, Science Labs, Stockton Road, Durham, UK. ^3^Guangzhou Institute of Geochemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Guangzhou, China. 

> - **Presentation type:** Poster

> - **Presentation time:** [Thursday 16:30 - 18:30](../sessions_comparison.md#__tabbed_3_6), [Room Poster Hall](../maps_venue.md#__tabbed_1_1)

> - **Poster Board Number:** [249](../map_poster_boards.md#thursday)

> - **Programme No:** 1.1.35

> - [Theme 1](../theme1.md) > [Session 1](../sessions/session-1-1.md)

--- 

:fontawesome-solid-book: **Abstract**

Formation of economically significant porphyry deposits requires vast amounts of magmatic volatiles (H~2~O, Cl, and S). However, the conditions enhancing efficient trans-crustal delivery of volatile fluxes remain unclear. In this work, we investigate the water contents of zircon and volatile compositions of zircon-hosted apatite of the co-sourced pre-ore (ca. 110 Ma), syn-ore (ca. 103Ma), and post-ore (ca. 97 Ma) intrusions in the Zijinshan porphyry-epithermal ore field (ZOF) in South China. Although geochemically similar, zircon-hosted apatite inclusions from the syn-ore porphyry yielded highly variable Cl (0.14-2.94 wt.%) and F (0.04-3.37 wt.%) contents, whereas the pre-ore and post-ore apatite populations show restricted halogen compositions (0.62-2.70 wt.% Cl, and 0.41-1.56 wt.% F). Numerical modeling of apatite evolutionary trends suggests that the syn-ore magma had the highest initial melt H~2~O (5.08 wt.%) and Cl (2035 ppm) contents, reaching volatile saturation at ~215MPa and exsolving fluids with a salinity of ~7.0 wt.% NaCl eq., consistent with zircon data. In comparison, pre-ore and post-ore magmas had lower initial H~2~O (3.6-3.9 wt. %) and Cl (890-1370 ppm) contents, saturating at ~80-166 MPa with less saline fluid (2.3-4.7 wt.% NaCl eq.). We suggest that the syn-ore saturated conditions optimize Cl-Cu extraction efficiency, promoting the formation of connected ore-fluid networks and fluxes that are favourable for porphyry mineralization. Given the lack of direct syn-ore mafic magma input, we propose that fluids derived from underplating mafic magmas serve as the dominant volatile accumulation mechanism for porphyry mineralization in the ZOF.

