# Explosive Eruptions at Mount St. Helens: The Influence of Volatile Content in W Tephra Deposits on Eruptive Styles

**^^Oceana Apollo^^ , Rebecca deGraffenried**

<!-- more -->> - **Affiliations:** University of Missouri, Department of Geological Sciences, Missouri, USA

> - **Presentation type:** Poster

> - **Presentation time:** [Thursday 16:30 - 18:30](../sessions_comparison.md#__tabbed_3_6), [Room Poster Hall](../maps_venue.md#__tabbed_1_1)

> - **Poster Board Number:** [244](../map_poster_boards.md#thursday)

> - **Programme No:** 1.1.30

> - [Theme 1](../theme1.md) > [Session 1](../sessions/session-1-1.md)

--- 

:fontawesome-solid-book: **Abstract**

Pre-eruptive H~2~O content impacts eruptive behavior as greater H~2~O content is associated with more explosive eruptions. This study examines pre-eruptive H~2~O content of W tephra deposits from three explosive eruptions (Wn, Wb, and Wd) during the Kalama period (1479--1482 CE) at Mount St. Helens using liquid-plagioclase hygrometry. Differences in pre-eruptive H~2~O content could potentially explain shifts in eruption style and explosivity preserved by the W tephra deposits that are otherwise chemically similar.
Electron probe microanalysis (EPMA) of plagioclase crystals shows a wide range of anorthite component for core compositions, but narrower for rim compositions, indicating that the W tephra eruptions were sourced from similar final depths. Preliminary hygrometer calculations show an overlap in H~2~O content between the most explosive (Wn) and one of the less explosive eruptions (Wb). However, a distinctly lower H~2~O concentration is indicated in the sequence's final eruption (Wd), which was also less explosive. H~2~O solubility indicates the Wn and Wb eruptions equilibrated ~0.5 km deeper than the Wd eruption. These trends are supported by the prevalence of amphibole reaction rims in Wd samples that are missing in Wn and Wb samples. These results indicate that differences in pre-eruptive H~2~O content can only partially explain differences in eruption behavior. Additional W tephra samples will be studied, including samples from the other major explosive eruption (We), to confirm these preliminary trends. These results have implications for forecasting future eruption behavior at Mount St. Helens and understanding what drives eruption style and intensity at a high-threat volcano.

