# Trace element diffusion in tephrite-phonolite couple experiments as a function of temperature, H2O contents and oxygen fugacity

**Diego González-García^1,2^, Ingo Horn^1^, Felix Marxer^1^, François Holtz^1^**

<!-- more -->> - **Affiliations:**  ^1^Institute of Earth System Sciences, Leibniz Universität Hannover, Germany; ^2^Department of Mineralogy and Petrology, Universidad Complutense de Madrid, Spain 

> - **Presentation type:** Poster

> - **Presentation time:** [Monday 16:30 - 18:30](../sessions_comparison.md#__tabbed_1_6), [Room Poster Hall](../maps_venue.md#__tabbed_1_1)

> - **Poster Board Number:** [77](../map_poster_boards.md#monday)

> - **Programme No:** 1.2.22

> - [Theme 1](../theme1.md) > [Session 2](../sessions/session-1-2.md)

--- 

:fontawesome-solid-book: **Abstract**

Trace element diffusion in magmas is of major importance, as trace elements are used as proxies for a large variety of igneous processes (magma recharge, crystal growth/dissolution or volatile exsolution) and their associated timescales. The database of diffusion coefficients (D) has increased significantly in the last decades, but gaps still exist for water-rich melts. Moreover, although alkaline melts constitute a significant volume of ocean island magmatism, such liquids are generally under-represented in the current trace element diffusion database.
Therefore, a series of interdiffusion experiments between tephritic and phonolitic melts from the Canary Islands were run in internally heated pressure vessels at variable conditions (300 MPa, 1150-1300°C, 0.3-3.3 wt.% H~2~O). Concentrations of 13 trace elements (V, Zr, Nb, Co, Ta, Hf, U, Th, Sn, Sr, Ba, Rb and Cs) were determined by LA-ICP-MS and effective binary diffusion coefficients (D) were obtained by a modified Boltzmann-Matano analysis. Preliminary results show a systematic relationship between trace element diffusion and ionic radius (r) in all runs, with a maximum in diffusivity at r ~ 1 Å (Sn, Sr, Ba). As already observed for major elements [1], log D of trace elements show a non-linear relationship with melt H~2~O contents with a convergence of D towards the water-rich end at different temperatures. This dataset will allow constraining magma interactions and dynamics in bimodal eruptions, in Tenerife and other islands, where banded pumices resulting from mixing between basanite/tephrite and phonolite are common.
[1] González-García, D. *et al.* (2024). Eur. J. Mineral. 36(4), 623--640. doi: 10.5194/ejm-36-623-2024

