# Diffusion in K-feldspar: Sr, Ba, Ti and P diffusion experiments in sanidine

**Aurore Toussaint^1^, Anne-Sophie Bouvier^1^, Florent Plane^1^, and Othmar Müntener^1^**

<!-- more -->> - **Affiliations:** ^1^Institute of Earth Sciences, University of Lausanne, 1015 Lausanne, Switzerland

> - **Presentation type:** Poster

> - **Presentation time:** [Monday 16:30 - 18:30](../sessions_comparison.md#__tabbed_1_6), [Room Poster Hall](../maps_venue.md#__tabbed_1_1)

> - **Poster Board Number:** [76](../map_poster_boards.md#monday)

> - **Programme No:** 1.2.21

> - [Theme 1](../theme1.md) > [Session 2](../sessions/session-1-2.md)

--- 

:fontawesome-solid-book: **Abstract**

Diffusion is a key to understand the timescales of magma dynamics, and thus the evolution of igneous systems. K-feldspar is a major rock-forming mineral in felsic plutonic rocks occasionally forming megacrysts, investigating the diffusion behaviour of trace elements in K-feldspar provides valuable information on magma reservoir dynamics.
To provide better constraints on the timing of magmatic processes, there is a need for accurate diffusion coefficients. Therefore, we performed diffusion experiments in sanidine (Or~98~) at 1 atm pressure, between 825 and 1050 °C, for diffusion normal to (010) at controlled aSiO~2~, from times ranging from 1 month to 6 months. Sources of diffusant were SrO-, BaO-, TiO~2~- and P~2~O~5~-doped cristobalite or SrO- and BaO-doped cristobalite (prepared using the sol-gel method) mixed with ground sanidine (1:1), or with ground sanidine and apatite (1:1:1). The experimental products were then analysed by SIMS depth profiling. Sr diffusion rate is ~2 orders of magnitude slower than previously determined, while Ba, Ti and P did not show any measurable diffusion profiles, indicating that Ba and Ti likely diffuse more slowly than previously determined. Zoning in Ba in natural K-feldspar megacrysts thus predominantly records crystal growth processes that are weakly affected by diffusion. To further investigate Ba diffusion, we annealed a natural sanidine megacryst with complex Ba zonation (Taápacá, Chile, Rout et al. 2020) at 925 °C for 3 months at controlled aSiO~2~.Ba profile (before and after annealing) were measured with EPMA and LA-ICP-MS to potentially retrieve diffusion coefficient for Ba.    

