# Slow and Steady or Sudden? Integration of Crystal Records and Geophysical Signals prior to the 2008 eruption of Okmok Volcano (AK)

**Terry Plank^1^, Daniel Lee^1^, Shuo Ding^1,2^, Yves Moussallam^1^, Euan Mutch^3^, Jamshid Moshrefzadeh^4^, Nathan Graham^5^, Jessica Larsen^5^, Jeffrey Freymueller^6^**

<!-- more -->> - **Affiliations:**  ^1^Lamont Doherty Earth Observatory, Columbia University, Palisades, NY,USA; ^2^Department of Geological Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL, USA; ^3^Earth Observatory of Singapore, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore; ^4^Alaska Division of Geological and Geophysical Survey, State of Alaska, Fairbanks, AK, USA; ^5^Geophysical Institute, University of Alaska Fairbanks, AK, USA; ^6^Department of Earth & Environmental Science, Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI, USA 

> - **Presentation type:** Talk

> - **Presentation time:** [Monday 09:30 - 09:45](../sessions_comparison.md#__tabbed_1_3), [Room R280](../maps_venue.md#__tabbed_1_1)

> - **Programme No:** 1.2.5

> - [Theme 1](../theme1.md) > [Session 2](../sessions/session-1-2.md)

--- 

:fontawesome-solid-book: **Abstract**

One physical model for eruption is reservoir inflation reaching a critical threshold, successfully employed to forecast Axial Volcano's 2011 eruption [1] and to hindcast Okmok Volcano's 2008 eruption (OK08) [2]. However, OK08 was also preceded by a five-hour seismic swarm, extending to ~16 km depth [3]. Was OK08 driven by slow and steady inflation or a sudden event? To answer this question, we investigated OK08 melt inclusions (MIs) and olivines to constrain the depth and timing of magmatic events. A bespoke piston-cylinder technique was used to resorb CO~2~ in shrinkage bubbles. Some restored MIs contain > 1700 ppm CO~2~, reflecting volatile saturation pressures (~380 MPa or ~16 km depth) that coincide with the deepest seismicity during the 5hr swarm. The high CO~2~ MIs also have unusual compositions (CaO > 11 wt%) only found in ash erupted within the first hours of eruption [4]. The complete lack of zonation in some olivines that are otherwise out of equilibrium in host melt requires rapid transport (< days), while other olivines record mixing events that occurred days to years prior to eruption. Thus, the 5hr precursory seismicity corresponds to a deep and chemically distinct magmatic input, which forged a new vent from that which hosted the prior century's eruptions. The OK08 eruption was triggered by a sudden recharge event, distinct from earlier magmatic inputs events (largely aseismic but driving inflation) that may have nonetheless primed the system for eruption.
[1] Chadwick 2022. [2] Albright 2019. [3] Garza-Giron 2023. [4] Larsen 2013.

