# Geological constraints on the crystallization timescales of high-silica magmas and the diffusivity of Ti in quartz in the Searchlight Magmatic System (NV, USA)

**^^Ayla S Pamukcu^^ ^1^, Sarah M Hickernell^1^, Michael P Eddy^2^, Blair Schoene^3^, Travis Steiner-Leach^4^**

<!-- more -->> - **Affiliations:** ^1^Earth and Planetary Sciences, Stanford University, Stanford, USA; ^2^Department of Earth, Atmospheric, and Planetary Sciences, Purdue University, West Lafayette, USA; ^3^Department of Geosciences, Princeton University, Princeton, USA; ^4^Plutonium Science and Technology Group, Materials Science Division, Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, Livermore, USA

> - **Presentation type:** Poster

> - **Presentation time:** [Tuesday 16:30 - 18:30](../sessions_comparison.md#__tabbed_2_6), [Room Poster Hall](../maps_venue.md#__tabbed_1_1)

> - **Poster Board Number:** [273](../map_poster_boards.md#tuesday)

> - **Programme No:** 1.3.18

> - [Theme 1](../theme1.md) > [Session 3](../sessions/session-1-3.md)

--- 

:fontawesome-solid-book: **Abstract**

High-silica magmas (≥68 wt. % SiO~2~) source some of the most impactful volcanic eruptions on Earth. Crystallization timescales estimated for these magmas vary widely (10^1^-10^6^ a), with a particularly large gap between results from zircon geochronology and quartz geospeedometry. However, recent work re-examining the diffusivity of Ti in quartz has introduced new uncertainty into our understanding of this parameter and results from Ti-in-quartz geospeedometry. Here, we utilize constraints from field relations, geochronology, geobarometry, geochemistry, heat loss models, and crystal growth rates to establish limits on the crystallization timescales of high-silica magmas in a natural system. We use these limits to critically assess the Ti-in-quartz diffusivity in this system.
The Searchlight Magmatic System (NV, USA) includes the tectonically tilted Searchlight pluton and coeval Highland Range volcanics. Prior work suggests high-silica magmas (rhyolite, leucogranite) in this system represent melts extracted from the pluton. Results from Ti-in-quartz diffusion chronometry of a rhyolite unit range from 10^2^-10^8^ a, depending on the diffusion law applied. Results using the two slowest diffusivities exceed timescales suggested by zircon geochronology of the plutonic source (100-200 ka), plagioclase sizes (10^0^-<10^3^ a), and heat loss models (10^1^-10^3^ a). Quartz growth rates estimated using the Ti-in-quartz timescales are 10^-12^-10^-21^ m/s; the slowest diffusivities produce rates that are slower than the slowest published rates for quartz and feldspars (10^-15^ m/s).  We conclude that crystallization of the high-silica rhyolite was substantially shorter (≤10^3^ a) than its source mush (10^4^-10^5^ a), and only the fastest Ti-in-quartz diffusion laws produce timescales consistent with geological constraints.

