# Investigating magmatic kinship and evolution in a recent arc-related explosive silicic conflagration: Volcán Huaynaputina and Ticsani in southern Peru

**Abby Gillen^1^, Shanaka de Silva^1^, Axel Schmitt^2^, Martin Danišík^2^, Dale Burns^3^, Guido Salas^4^**

<!-- more -->> - **Affiliations:** ^1^CEOAS: College of Earth, Ocean, and Atmospheric Sciences, Oregon State University, 104 Ocean Administration Building, SW 26th St, Corvallis, OR 97331; ^2^John de Laeter Centre, Curtin University, Kent Street, Bentley, Western Australia 6102, Australia; ^3^School of Earth, Energy, and Environmental Sciences, Stanford University, 450 Serra Mall, Stanford, CA 94305; ^4^Departamento Académico de Geologia y Geofisica, Universidad Nacional de San Agustin, Arequipa, Peru

> - **Presentation type:** Poster

> - **Presentation time:** [Tuesday 16:30 - 18:30](../sessions_comparison.md#__tabbed_2_6), [Room Poster Hall](../maps_venue.md#__tabbed_1_1)

> - **Poster Board Number:** [281](../map_poster_boards.md#tuesday)

> - **Programme No:** 1.3.23

> - [Theme 1](../theme1.md) > [Session 3](../sessions/session-1-3.md)

--- 

:fontawesome-solid-book: **Abstract**

Peruvian volcanoes Huaynaputina and Ticsani have produced large (VEI 6 and 4, respectively) dacitic eruptions during the Holocene and share similar mineralogical, chemical, and isotopic characteristics. Previous studies have suggested a genetic link between these volcanoes, proposing a shared magmatic reservoir at depth. Since large, long-lived magmatic systems at depth can sustain volcanoes capable of producing large explosive eruptions, understanding the potential petrogenetic relationship between Huaynaputina and Ticsani has significant implications for hazard assessments and interpretations of geophysical monitoring data. We further explore the hypothesis that these two magmatic systems are petrogenetically linked through U-series zircon geochronology. By comparing zircon age spectra, we seek to 1) determine if pulses of crystallization are contemporaneous across both systems and 2) compare the longevity of their crystallization histories. We also leverage zircon double-dating (U-Th/He) of previously analyzed grains to yield new eruption ages for Ticsani, whose eruptive chronology is poorly constrained. Preliminary U-Th disequilibrium ages for the Ticsani dacite reveals a long, episodic history of zircon crystallization that extends past 300 ka (the limit of the technique). Similarly, zircon from the 1600 AD eruption of Huaynaputina provides a record of crystallization spanning approximately 300 ka. These preliminary data showcase the long-lived nature of the magmatism at Huaynaputina and Ticsani. Zircon geochronology provides a novel perspective on these two volcanoes, offering new insights into the timing and tempo of magmatism and volcanism in southern Peru.

