# The anatomy of a magmatic system, revealed by multi-disciplinary seismological methods in central Costa Rica

**^^Elliot Amir Jiwani-Brown^^  ^1^, Francisco Munoz ^1^, Ivan Koulakov ^2^, Thomas Planès ^1^, Mauricio Mora ^3^, Javier Pacheco ^4^, Matteo Lupi ^1^**

<!-- more -->> - **Affiliations:** ^1^Département des Sciences de la Terre et de Géophysique, Université de Genève ^2^Institute of Petroleum, Geology and Geophysics, Siberian Branch of the Russian Academy of Sciences ^3^Red Sismológica Nacional (RSN), Escuela Centroamericana de Geología, Universidad de Costa Rica ^4^Observatorio Vulcanológico y Sismológico de Costa Rica (OVSICORI), Universidad Nacional Costa Rica

> - **Presentation type:** Poster

> - **Presentation time:** [Friday 16:30 - 18:00](../sessions_comparison.md#__tabbed_4_6), [Room Poster Hall](../maps_venue.md#__tabbed_1_1)

> - **Poster Board Number:** [14](../map_poster_boards.md#friday)

> - **Programme No:** 1.5.21

> - [Theme 1](../theme1.md) > [Session 5](../sessions/session-1-5.md)

--- 

:fontawesome-solid-book: **Abstract**

We deployed a temporary network composed of 20 seismic stations, saturated with a further 46-permanent Costa Rica (OVSICORI and RSN) network, from April 2018 to May 2019. 
We obtained a database of 967-local-earthquakes, producing an optimised local 1D-velocity-model to more precisely locate events. Clustering and alignments of seismicity obtained with HypoDD were interpreted as diverse interactions between locally-driven fluid-flow in ductile magmatic zones, and brittle deformation within the volcanic system. Intersecting right-and-left-lateral strike-slip regimes dominated local-scale deformation. These two primary motions are linked to the opposing regional-scale tectonic escape of the forearc sliver, and Panama microplate rotation. We observe that Irazú and Turrialba volcanoes are influenced sub-independently, as seismicity associated with each volcano related to geographic proximity to regional-scale tectonic influences. 
By focusing on low-frequency seismic noise, we constrained a 3D-shear-velocity model using Ambient Noise Tomography (ANT). This revealed multiple low-velocity anomalies, interpreted as an intermediate depth common magmatic reservoir feeding two shallower magmatic/hydrothermal systems. We also derived a travel-time, local-scale tomography using LOTOS from the relocated earthquake catalogue. The Local Earthquake Tomography (LET) revealed contrasting low and high Vp/Vs ratio anomalies at intermediate crustal depths beneath the volcanoes, suggesting two separately operating magmatic reservoirs, within a larger, shared ductile region. Both intermediate-depth reservoirs showed evidence of feeding from a deeper magmatic source, and also connectivity to the surface through shallow systems of upward-fluid-migration. 
The combination of earthquake relocation, ambient-noise and local-earthquake tomography produced comprehensive agreement between three established passive-seismic methods, linking seismicity, neotectonics and volcanism at regional- and local-scales. 

