# Using satellite geodesy to understand magmatic architecture and rheology

**^^Juliet Biggs^1^^^ , Gregor Weber^1,2^, Catherine Annen^3^**

<!-- more -->> - **Affiliations:** 1COMET, School of Earth Sciences, University of Bristol 2 School of Ocean and Earth Science, University of Southampton, Southampton, UK 3 Institute of Geophysics, Czech Academy of Sciences, Prague, Czech Republic

> - **Presentation type:** Poster

> - **Presentation time:** [Friday 16:30 - 18:00](../sessions_comparison.md#__tabbed_4_6), [Room Poster Hall](../maps_venue.md#__tabbed_1_1)

> - **Poster Board Number:** [1](../map_poster_boards.md#friday)

> - **Programme No:** 1.5.8

> - [Theme 1](../theme1.md) > [Session 5](../sessions/session-1-5.md)

--- 

:fontawesome-solid-book: **Abstract**

Satellite technology has revolutionised the coverage, resolution and frequency of deformation.  Dense time-series of high-resolution images reveal complexity and diversity than was not apparent when only infrequent point measurements were available and are more compatible with the paradigm of extensive multiphase, magmatic systems. Here we integrate thermal models of crustal-scale magma evolution with thermo-mechanical simulations of ground deformation. This allows us to determine the influence of long-term magmatic flux over 10^5^-10^6^ years on viscoelastic deformation patterns spanning a10-year observation period for a range of overpressure source depths. Our results reveal a coupling between surface deformation and the protracted thermal evolution of magma systems, modulated by magma flux and system lifespan. Variations in plumbing system architecture contribute to diverse surface deformation styles at different volcanoes. Relatively cold magma systems (~750℃ after 1Ma) exhibit cycles of uplift and subsidence, while comparatively hot plumbing systems (~900℃ after 1Ma) experience solely uplift, albeit at decaying rates. These findings align exceptionally with independent geophysical and geodetic observations from case study caldera systems in the East African Rift, emphasizing the potential of surface deformation measurements as tool for deciphering the physical state and architecture of magmatic plumbing systems. Our study emphasizes that considering long term magmatic system evolution is imperative for accurate interpretation of volcanic unrest signals.

