# CO2 gas content measured in the 2024 Svartsengi, Iceland eruptions used to elucidate magma storage conditions

**^^Melissa Anne Pfeffer^1^^^ , Samuel Warren Scott^2^, Celine Lucie Mandon^1^, Michelle Maree Parks^1^, Andri Stefánsson^2^, Nicolas Levillayer^2^, Jón Bjarni Friðriksson^1^, Clive Oppenheimer^3^, Mike Burton^4^, Catherine Rachael Gallagher^5^**

<!-- more -->> - **Affiliations:** ^1^Service and Research Division, Icelandic Meteorological Office, Reykjavik, Iceland; ^2^Institute of Earth Sciences, University of Iceland, Reykjavik, Iceland; ^3^Department of Geography, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK; ^4^Department of Earth and Environmental Sciences, University of Manchester, Manchester, UK; ^5^Research and Development Division, HS Orka, Grindavik, Iceland

> - **Presentation type:** Poster

> - **Presentation time:** [Friday 16:30 - 18:00](../sessions_comparison.md#__tabbed_4_6), [Room Poster Hall](../maps_venue.md#__tabbed_1_1)

> - **Poster Board Number:** [12](../map_poster_boards.md#friday)

> - **Programme No:** 1.5.19

> - [Theme 1](../theme1.md) > [Session 5](../sessions/session-1-5.md)

--- 

:fontawesome-solid-book: **Abstract**

The 2023-2024 eruptions within the Svartsengi volcanic system, Iceland are likely sourced by a series of sill-type magma bodies which reside within an extensive magma domain. These magma pockets are effectively modeled as a deflating Mogi source during each event to derive the optimal depth of the magma body that fails at the onset of each dike intrusion/eruption. CO~2~ is readily degassed from silicate melts at greater depths than other more soluble major volcanic gases. A diminishment of CO~2~ relative to H~2~O and SO~2~ measured in the gases released in the first stages of an eruption, in comparison with an expected initial composition, helps to reveal the pre-eruptive conditions of the magma. CO~2~ loss prior to eruption is a function of the storage depth of the individual magma pockets as CO~2~ solubility is strongly pressure dependent as well as the time available for segregation and loss. The time prior to an eruption allows the magma in the storage region to degas its insoluble CO~2~, while at the same time, fresher magma flowing in from a deeper source that contains close to the original CO~2~ content is mixing in. We present here a series of FTIR measurements of gases released early in these eruptions. In combination with the results of geodetic modeling, we use the CO~2~ content of the gasses to learn more about the contribution of outgassed CO~2~ to the measured deformation signal as well as the rate of CO~2~ loss in the magma storage region prior to each eruption.

