# The contribution of petrological monitoring during recent eruptive crises of Mt. Etna, Italy

**Rosa Anna Corsaro**

<!-- more -->> - **Affiliations:** Istituto Nazionale di Geofisica e Vulcanologia, sezione di Catania, Osservatorio Etneo, Catania (Italy) 

> - **Presentation type:** Talk [Invited]

> - **Presentation time:** [Tuesday 10:45 - 11:00](../sessions_comparison.md#__tabbed_2_5), [Room R380](../maps_venue.md#__tabbed_1_1)

> - **Programme No:** 1.6.2

> - [Theme 1](../theme1.md) > [Session 6](../sessions/session-1-6.md)

--- 

:fontawesome-solid-book: **Abstract**

Mt. Etna is one of the most active basaltic volcanoes in the world and one of the best monitored, namely by the Istituto Nazionale di Geofisica e Vulcanologia, Osservatorio Etneo (INGV-OE), with instrumental networks, field surveys and laboratory analyses. In particular, the petrological monitoring has been carried out since the 1990's, and with the enhancement of its organization over time, today enables following the evolution of volcanic crises that may be potentially dangerous for the local population.
Firstly, the contribution illustrates the organization of petrological monitoring at INGV-OE during an on-going eruption (syn-eruptive monitoring). The procedure consists of different steps, which involve an expert staff tasked with the sampling, archiving of collected materials, preparation of the samples, laboratory analyses and data interpretation. Results, which are integrated with information from other monitoring disciplines, are focused to rapidly detect the preliminary characteristics of magmatic processes driving the eruptive activity and to infer the possible temporal evolution of the on-going phenomena. Detailed aspects of pre-eruptive and eruptive processes can be investigated with more extended petrological studies, which require additional time and expertize. The second part of the contribution focuses on the results of petrological monitoring applied to the high‑frequency 2020-2022 lava fountains of the South‑East Crater (Mt. Etna). Finally, the procedures of petrological monitoring are critically discussed to identify strengths and weaknesses in evaluating the evolution of volcanic phenomena, in order to provide reliable scientific information to support the decision-makers responsible for managing volcanic crises.

