# Overview of recent Hawaiian eruptions (2023--present)

**^^Natalia I. Deligne^^ ^1^, Josephine Barnett^1^, Ninfa Bennington^1^, Michael Cappos^1^, Jefferson Chang^1^, Julie Chang^1^, Meghann Decker^2^, Liliana Desmither^1^, Peter Dotray^1^, Drew T. Downs^1^, Andria P. Ellis^1^, Ashton Flinders^1^, Lichen Forster^2^, John Jamora^1^, Ingrid Johanson^1^, Arthur Jolly^1^, Elisabeth Gallant^1,2^, Madeline Hawk^3^, Ken Hon^1^, Thomas-Jon K. Hoomanawanui^1^, Kevan Kamibayashi^1^, Brianna Lopez^1^, Steven Lundblad^2^, Kendra J. Lynn^1^, Baylee McDade^1^, Katherine Mulliken^1^, Patricia Nadeau^1^, Abigail R. Nalesnik^4^, Matthew Patrick^1^, David A. Phillips^1^, Kamalani Poepoe^2^, Christine Sealing^3^, William Tollett^1^, Frank A. Trusdell^1^, S. M. Warren^1^, Heather Winslow^1^, Michael Zoeller^1^**

<!-- more -->> - **Affiliations:** ^1^U.S. Geological Survey - Hawaiian Volcano Observatory, Hilo, Hawaii, USA; ^2^University of Hawaiʻi at Hilo, Hilo, Hawaii, USA; ^3^Research Corporation of the University of Hawaiʻi, Hilo, Hawaii, USA; ^4^University of Delaware, Newark, Delaware, USA

> - **Presentation type:** Talk

> - **Presentation time:** [Tuesday 10:30 - 10:45](../sessions_comparison.md#__tabbed_2_5), [Room R380](../maps_venue.md#__tabbed_1_1)

> - **Programme No:** 1.6.1

> - [Theme 1](../theme1.md) > [Session 6](../sessions/session-1-6.md)

--- 

:fontawesome-solid-book: **Abstract**

This presentation covers the numerous eruptions and shallow intrusions in Hawaii between the 2023 and 2025 IAVCEI Scientific Assemblies.
At the time of writing (December 2024), all activity has occurred at Kīlauea volcano, with six eruptions and several intrusive episodes, all confined within Hawai'i Volcanoes National Park. Although these episodes have caused no threat to life, intrusions and ground deformation damaged a key road and fissures and associated lava flows destroyed part of a backcountry trail and a campground.
What is remarkable about activity since early 2023 is its geographic diversity. The first two eruptions (January--March 2023, June 2023) occurred in the same location as previous Kīlauea post-2018 caldera collapse eruptions: in Halema'uma'u, within Kaluapele (Kīlauea's summit caldera). The September 2023 eruption started in Halema'uma'u but then propagated eastward, albeit remaining within Kaluapele. The next two eruptions left Kaluapele altogether, with a 10-hour long Southwest Rift Zone (SWRZ) eruption in June 2024, and an approximately 5-day upper/middle East Rift Zone (ERZ) eruption in September 2024. Both eruptions were preceded by intrusive activity and widespread seismicity: an intrusion in the upper SWRZ in January 2024 caused ground cracking, and intrusive activity in the upper ERZ damaged a main national park road. Eruptive activity returned to Halema'uma'u in December 2024.
The U.S. Geological Survey's Hawaiian Volcano Observatory has used this period of frequent and diverse activity to improve our monitoring network, test and practice new methods, and continue engagement with our many partners and communities.

