# Eruptive dynamics of a long-lasting, hybrid eruption: physical and textural characterization of the 2021 Tajogaite eruption (La Palma, Spain)

**^^Marija Voloschina^1^^^ , Serena Da Mommio^1^, Beverley C. Coldwell^2,3^, Alessandro Vona^4^, Nemesio M. Pérez^2,3^, Costanza Bonadonna^5^, Marco Pistolesi^1^**

<!-- more -->> - **Affiliations:**  ^1^Department of Earth Sciences, University of Pisa, Pisa, Italy; ^2^Instituto Volcanológico de Canarias (INVOLCAN), Puerto de la Cruz, Tenerife, Canary Islands, Spain; ^3^Environmental Research Division, Instituto Tecnológico y de Energías Renovables (ITER), Granadilla de Abona, Tenerife, Canary Islands, Spain; ^4^Dipartimento di Scienze, Università degli Studi Roma Tre, Roma, Italy; ^5^Department of Earth Sciences, University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland 

> - **Presentation type:** Poster

> - **Presentation time:** [Tuesday 16:30 - 18:30](../sessions_comparison.md#__tabbed_2_6), [Room Poster Hall](../maps_venue.md#__tabbed_1_1)

> - **Poster Board Number:** [237](../map_poster_boards.md#tuesday)

> - **Programme No:** 1.6.13

> - [Theme 1](../theme1.md) > [Session 6](../sessions/session-1-6.md)

--- 

:fontawesome-solid-book: **Abstract**

Hybrid eruptions comprise of effusive and explosive behaviour occurring simultaneously or in quick succession. In long-term records, this activity tends to be overlooked due to the challenges of identifying simultaneous activity from deposits. Therefore, the study of tephra sequences associated with well-documented hybrid eruptions is particularly valuable.
The recent Tajogaite eruption (Canary Islands) lasted for 86 days and the eruptive activity consisted of effusive activity from the base of the newly-formed cone and contemporaneous explosive activity from the summit vents. A textural, morphological and geochemical characterization of the juvenile material ejected during the Tajogaite eruption is presented to frame changes in eruptive dynamics and underlying conduit processes. We distinguish three eruptive phases: the high intensity Phase I contains highly vesicular clasts of irregular to spongy morphology and a wide range in vesicularity (⁓55-68%), while volume-normalised vesicle numbers N~V~^m^ show limited variability (11.4-16.6 × 10^6^ cm^-3^). Phase II marks an overall decrease in eruption intensity towards more intermittent activity. The associated juvenile material shows a lower, limited vesicularity, with variable N~V~^m^ and irregular to subspherical morphologies. In the final Phase III, eruption intensity increases again, with pyroclasts displaying variable morphologies, high N~V~^m^ values (24-85.2 × 10^6^ cm^-3^), and ⁓60% vesicularity.
The observed morphological and textural variability of the tephra indicate syn-eruptive changes in the conduit that can be related to the presence of multiple, simultaneously active conduits with different geometries. These exert a temporally and spatially variable control on magma outgassing, fragmentation and crystallization, resulting in the observed hybrid activity.

