# Diffuse He/CO2 and H2/CO2 from Cumbre Vieja volcano during the Tajogaite eruption, La Palma, Canary Islands

**^^Gladys V. Melián^^ ^1,2^,  María Asensio-Ramos^1^, Eleazar Padrón ^1,2^, Germán D. Padilla^1,2^,  Ana Girones^1,2^, Daniela Taño Ramos^1^, Laura Trujillo Vargas^1^, Claudia Ramos Delgado^1^, Sttefany Cartaya^1,2^, Mónica Arencibia^1,2^, Pedro A. Hernández^1,2^, Nemesio M. Pérez^1,2^**

<!-- more -->> - **Affiliations:** ^1^Instituto Volcanológico de Canarias (INVOLCAN), Puerto de la Cruz, Tenerife, Canary Islands, Spain.   ^2^Instituto Tecnológico y de Energías Renovables (ITER), Granadilla de Abona, Tenerife, Canary Islands, Spain. 

> - **Presentation type:** Poster

> - **Presentation time:** [Tuesday 16:30 - 18:30](../sessions_comparison.md#__tabbed_2_6), [Room Poster Hall](../maps_venue.md#__tabbed_1_1)

> - **Poster Board Number:** [235](../map_poster_boards.md#tuesday)

> - **Programme No:** 1.6.12

> - [Theme 1](../theme1.md) > [Session 6](../sessions/session-1-6.md)

--- 

:fontawesome-solid-book: **Abstract**

La Palma (708 km²), located northwest of the Canary Archipelago, is one of the youngest islands (~2.0 Ma) and the most volcanically active according to historical records. On September 19, 2021, a volcanic eruption occurred in the southwestern sector of the Cumbre Vieja rift zone, the most active basaltic volcano in the Canaries. The eruption is considered as a basaltic fissure type, dominated by strombolian activity and with episodic phreatomagmatic pulses, concluding on December 13, 2021. This study focuses on the diffuse emissions of He, H~2~ and CO~2~ from the soil atmosphere of Cumbre Vieja, emphasizing the He/CO~2~ and H₂/CO~2~ ratios, considering that He and ~H2~ are highly mobile gases. He is chemically inert, radiologically stable, non-biogenic, highly mobile and poorly soluble in water, while H₂ is abundant in volcanic and hydrothermal systems and a key participant in redox reactions within hydrothermal reservoirs. Since 2002, and at each survey, soil gas samples have been regularly collected at ~40 cm depth using a metal probe at 600 sites. He was analyzed using a QMS-type spectrometer, while H₂ and CO~2~ were measured with a micro gas chromatograph. Spatial distribution maps constructed by sequential Gaussian simulation showed significant increases in He/CO~2~ and H₂/CO~2~ ratios before and during seismic swarms (2017-2021). During the eruption, these ratios also increased with the occurrence of volcanic tremor and preceded the peak of diffuse CO₂ emissions. In the absence of visible gas emissions (e.g. fumaroles, plumes), diffuse degassing surveys are essential geochemical tools for volcanic monitoring purposes. 

