# Multiple-phase geobarometry using Rhyolite-MELTS

**^^Sarah L. Smithies^^ ^1^, Guilherme A. R. Gualda^2^, Lydia J. Harmon^3^**

<!-- more -->> - **Affiliations:**  ^1^School of Earth and Environment, University of Canterbury, Christchurch, New Zealand; ^2^Department of Earth and Environmental Sciences, Vanderbilt University, TN, USA; ^3^ Department of Geology, Occidental College, CA, USA 

> - **Presentation type:** Poster

> - **Presentation time:** [Monday 16:30 - 18:30](../sessions_comparison.md#__tabbed_1_6), [Room Poster Hall](../maps_venue.md#__tabbed_1_1)

> - **Poster Board Number:** [47](../map_poster_boards.md#monday)

> - **Programme No:** 1.7.34

> - [Theme 1](../theme1.md) > [Session 7](../sessions/session-1-7.md)

--- 

:fontawesome-solid-book: **Abstract**

The quartz + feldspar Rhyolite-MELTS geobarometer has been applied to rhyolites worldwide and has proved a useful tool for estimating equilibration pressures. However, it is limited to magma saturated in quartz (mostly, rhyolite). Here, we show how the principles of the Rhyolite-MELTS geobarometer can be applied to estimate the saturation pressure of other phases (e.g. pyroxene and magnetite), estimate oxygen fugacity (*f~O2~*), and infer the equilibrium mineral assemblage. This extends the usefulness of the Rhyolite-MELTS geobarometer to a broader range of magmatic compositions.
We show examples of (1) storage pressure calculations from quartz-absent rhyodacites to rhyolites from Puyehue-Cordón Caulle, Chile; and (2) equilibration between extracted rhyolitic melt compositions and unknown mush mineral assemblages from the Taupō Volcanic Zone, New Zealand. In both cases, we find orthopyroxene + plagioclase ± quartz pressure solutions that agree with independent pressure and *f~O2~* estimates. Orthopyroxene saturation is sensitive to *f~O2~*, so independent *f~O2~* constraint is necessary for calculating plagioclase + orthopyroxene pressures. Alternatively, magnetite is also sensitive to *f~O2~* so searching within *f~O2~* space for plagioclase + orthopyroxene + magnetite pressures can give both pressure and *f~O2~* estimates. These methods are potentially useful for inferring the mineral assemblage a melt composition equilibrated with.
Our methods show how Rhyolite-MELTS geobarometry does not need to be limited to three phases. Multiple saturation of a higher number of phases can (1) give further constraints on intensive parameters; (2) yield pressure estimates with smaller uncertainties; and (3) help determine mineral assemblages that equilibrated with a given melt composition.

