# Trace element fingerprinting of felsic cumulate recycling in igneous amphibole: A case study from Milos, South Aegean Volcanic Arc, Greece

**Stamatios Xydous^1^, Ioannis P. Baziotis^1^, Jasper Berndt^2^, ^^Razvan-Gabriel Popa^3^^^ , Stephan Klemme^2^ Olivier Bachmann^3^**

<!-- more -->> - **Affiliations:** ^1^Department of Natural Resources Management & Agricultural Engineering, Agricultural University of Athens, Athens, Greece; ^2^Institut für Mineralogie, Westfälische Wilhelms-Universität Münster, Münster, Germany; ^3^Institute of Geochemistry and Petrology, ETH Zürich, Zürich, Switzerland

> - **Presentation type:** Poster

> - **Presentation time:** [Monday 16:30 - 18:30](../sessions_comparison.md#__tabbed_1_6), [Room Poster Hall](../maps_venue.md#__tabbed_1_1)

> - **Poster Board Number:** [26](../map_poster_boards.md#monday)

> - **Programme No:** 1.7.13

> - [Theme 1](../theme1.md) > [Session 7](../sessions/session-1-7.md)

--- 

:fontawesome-solid-book: **Abstract**

Numerous compositional and textural studies on igneous amphiboles document its utility as a recorder of magmatic processes, intensive parameters of magma storage and melt compositions. We herein explore the potential of fingerprinting evolved feldspar±zircon recycling from low-T felsic cumulates, by investigating the trace element systematics of amphiboles from the andesitic units of the Papafrangas (PFS) and Kalogeros (KAD) lava domes in NE Milos, Greece. The amphiboles are Mg-hastingsite/tschermakite and lack abrupt compositional zoning or extensive breakdown textures. The REE patterns of the amphiboles from PFS and KAD exhibit slight concave downwards patterns in LREE [La/Sm)~N~=0.6-1.7], flat HREE (Tb/Yb)~N~=0.3-0.5], and slight negative Eu anomalies (Eu/Eu*=0.7-0.9). Additionally, they display lower V and Sc contents compared to Milos amphiboles with clear recharge affinity (mafic enclaves) and lack the pronounced negative Eu anomaly that characterizes hornblendes that crystallize from evolved melts. Furthermore, PFS and KAD amphiboles stand out within the entire Milos compositional dataset due to their higher Ba, Eu, Zr and Hf contents. Such element records in various phases (e.g. plagioclase, glass) have been widely used to trace cumulate recycling in igneous systems (Elis et al. 2023). Partitioning of these moderately to highly incompatible elements in amphibole, along with the high Zr and Ba contents in the equilibrium melts, is inconsistent with evolution along a liquid line of descent and suggests an input from a cumulate melt component. We propose that amphibole should be regarded as a potential recorder of low-T cumulate recycling, offering additional insights into the petrological evolution of igneous suites.

