# Revisiting Tajao: using banded pumices to untangle magma dynamics in an intra-cycle eruption from the Las Cañadas volcano, Tenerife (Canary Islands)

**Diego González-García^1,2^, Maurizio Petrelli^3^, Helena Albert^4^, Renat Almeev^1^, Olaya Dorado^5^, Joan Marti^6^, François Holtz^1^**

<!-- more -->> - **Affiliations:** ^1^Institute of Earth System Sciences, Leibniz Universität Hannover, Germany; ^2^Department of Mineralogy and Petrology, Universidad Complutense de Madrid, Spain; ^3^Department of Physics and Geology, Università degli Studi di Perugia, Italy; ^4^Department of Mineralogy, Petrology and Applied Geology, Universitat de Barcelona, Spain; ^5^GEO3BCN, CSIC, Barcelona, Spain; ^6^IDAEA, CSIC, Barcelona, Spain

> - **Presentation type:** Talk

> - **Presentation time:** [Monday 14:45 - 15:00](../sessions_comparison.md#__tabbed_1_3), [Room R280](../maps_venue.md#__tabbed_1_1)

> - **Programme No:** 1.7.7

> - [Theme 1](../theme1.md) > [Session 7](../sessions/session-1-7.md)

--- 

:fontawesome-solid-book: **Abstract**

Banded pumices are widespread among explosive eruptions and are frequently regarded as evidence of pre- and syn-eruptive magma interactions in the plumbing system. Therefore, their study provides detailed information on the magma dynamics preceding and/or triggering eruptions. We present a petrological and geochemical study of banded pumices from the 320 ka Tajao eruption, a small (~3 km^3^ DRE), intra-cycle event belonging to the Diego Hernandez Formation (DHF), Las Cañadas edifice (Tenerife, Canary Islands). Although the Tajao banded pumices resemble those from other DHF ignimbrite bodies (e.g. El Abrigo [1]), major and trace element glass and mineral chemistry suggest different magma dynamics and end-member compositions. Compared to El Abrigo banded pumices, Tajao groundmass glass chemistry is more complex, with a trimodal distribution and more restricted composition range. Their trace element concentrations suggest a lesser contribution of evolved feldspar-rich magma mushes. In contrast, mafic glasses are tephritic-phonotephritic in composition and suggest the involvement of a Cpx-Krs-Pl bearing component, similar to El Abrigo mafic endmember. Complex mixing and mingling textures between mafic and silicic melts are ubiquitous. Furthermore, thermobarometric estimates on zoned Na-rich pyroxenes indicate significant heating of the phonolitic reservoir before the eruption. Our results expand previous work [2] and improve our knowledge on the long-term evolution of the DHF shallow phonolitic reservoir, which eventually led to the large-volume El Abrigo eruption at ca. 170 ka, the last caldera-forming eruption on Tenerife.
[1] González-García *et al.* (2022). J. Petrol. 63(3), egac009  
[2] Wolff, J. A. (1985). Geol. Mag. 122(6), 623--640

