# Volcano-Tectonic Modelling: The Migration of Magmatic Reservoirs

**^^Lewis Lovell^^  ^1^^^,^^  Benoit Taisne ^1^, Luca Dal Zilio ^1^**

<!-- more -->> - **Affiliations:** ^1^ Earth Observatory Singapore, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore, Singapore.

> - **Presentation type:** Poster

> - **Presentation time:** [Thursday 16:30 - 18:30](../sessions_comparison.md#__tabbed_3_6), [Room Poster Hall](../maps_venue.md#__tabbed_1_1)

> - **Poster Board Number:** [181](../map_poster_boards.md#thursday)

> - **Programme No:** 1.8.12

> - [Theme 1](../theme1.md) > [Session 8](../sessions/session-1-8.md)

--- 

:fontawesome-solid-book: **Abstract**

Arc-related magmatic reservoirs are thought to migrate in response to pre-, syn-, and post-thrust faulting, becoming increasingly vertically aligned due to enhanced edifice loading. This study aims to investigate the thermodynamic and mechanical co-evolution of magmatic plumbing systems and crustal structures, as well as their interactions with local and regional stress fields over million-year timescales. Our two- and three-dimensional numerical modelling approaches involve varying the onset and pre-existence of crustal structures alongside single and episodic magmatic intrusions into a visco-elasto-plastic crust. We simulate plutonic geochemical evolution and long-lived cold storage conditions through the parallelised computation of thermodynamic phase diagrams on high-performance computational infrastructures.
The geochemical, thermodynamic, and kinematic structures of volcanic plumbing systems, from mantle to surface, remain a topic of active inquiry. This work seeks to resolve aspects of reservoir migration due to compressional back-arc volcano-tectonic interactions and provide a suite of plumbing system reference models for geophysical and petrological interpretations. By integrating magma dynamics with tectonic processes over geological timescales, our research aims to advance the understanding of the connectedness of plutonic and volcanic systems in arc environments, contributing to improved insights into the timing and dynamics of volcanic unrest.

