# Nested eruptive pattern of multi-volcanisms based on the historical eruption records in Kirishima volcano, Kyushu, Japan

**Yasuhisa Tajima^1^, Tetsuo Kobayashi^2^, Chris Conway^3^**

<!-- more -->> - **Affiliations:** ^1^Research & Development Center, Nippon Koei Co., Ltd., Tsukuba, Japan, ^2^Disaster Prevention Research Institute, Kyoto University, Kagoshima, Japan, ^3^Volcanic Activity Research Group Geological Survey of Japan, AIST, Tsukuba, Japan 

> - **Presentation type:** Poster

> - **Presentation time:** [Thursday 16:30 - 18:30](../sessions_comparison.md#__tabbed_3_6), [Room Poster Hall](../maps_venue.md#__tabbed_1_1)

> - **Poster Board Number:** [183](../map_poster_boards.md#thursday)

> - **Programme No:** 1.8.14

> - [Theme 1](../theme1.md) > [Session 8](../sessions/session-1-8.md)

--- 

:fontawesome-solid-book: **Abstract**

Arc volcanoes pose some of the greatest volcanic risks to society due to their frequent explosive eruptions. Preparing for such events requires knowledge of past eruptive behavior gathered from the geological record. However, it can be difficult to decipher the exact timing and vent locations for recent eruptions without corresponding observational records. For this study, we have integrated geological data with newly reviewed historical eruption records for the active Kirishima volcano in Kyushu, Japan, that has erupted repeatedly during the historical period. We used three historical documents to examine the presence or absence of eruptions and identify their source vents since the 8th century. The results suggest that a magmatic eruption occurred at Ioyama in the late 16th century, based on the historical record and a previously published ^14^C age. Another record indicates that Shinmoedake had been quiet prior to 1656 CE. In addition, the 14th and 15th centuries were periods of considerable quiescence, with a lack of eruption records for the entire Kirishima volcano during that time. These results indicate that the activity mode of Kirishima volcano changed from a single-volcano phase at Ohachi from the 8th to 13th century to a multi-volcano phase after the 16th century. During the multi-volcano phase of activity, eruption transitions from Ohachi to Shinmoedake/Ebinokogen-Ioyama occurred on decadal timescales. Transitions from single-volcano to multi-volcano phases at Kirishima volcano and other broad stratovolcanoes can occur over millenia, but may also undergo relatively rapid transitions on decadal timescales or within eruption events. 

