# Magma mixing in a dacitic plumbing system of Citlaltépetl volcano around ∼4 kyr BP, eastern Trans-Mexican Volcanic Belt

**^1^José Luis Arce, J.L., ^2^José Luis Macías, ^3^Rafael Torres-Orozco, ^1^Delphine Sourisseau, ^4^José Juan Carrillo-Mondragón, ^5^Mireya González-Herrera, ^2^Denis Ramón Avellán**

<!-- more -->> - **Affiliations:** ^1^Instituto de Geología, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, Ciudad Universitaria Coyoacán, Ciudad de México, México, ^2^Instituto de Geofísica, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, Antigua Carretera a Pátzcuaro 8701, Morelia, Michoacán, México, ^3^Centro de Ciencias de la Tierra, Universidad Veracruzana, Xalapa, Veracruz, México, ^4^Posgrado en Ciencias de la Tierra, UNAM, Ciudad Universitaria Coyoacán, Ciudad de México, México, ^5^Escuela Superior de Ingeniería y Arquitectura, Instituto Politécnico Nacional, Ticomásn, Ciudad de México, México.

> - **Presentation type:** Poster

> - **Presentation time:** [Thursday 16:30 - 18:30](../sessions_comparison.md#__tabbed_3_6), [Room Poster Hall](../maps_venue.md#__tabbed_1_1)

> - **Poster Board Number:** [178](../map_poster_boards.md#thursday)

> - **Programme No:** 1.8.9

> - [Theme 1](../theme1.md) > [Session 8](../sessions/session-1-8.md)

--- 

:fontawesome-solid-book: **Abstract**

Magma mixing is a common mechanism at the active Citlaltépetl volcano (5,650 above sea level), located in the eastern Trans-Mexican Volcanic Belt. We document two explosive eruptions (Avalos ~4 kyr BP and Jamapa <5 kyr BP) that generated pyroclastic density currents. The Jamapa Vulcanian-type eruption generated a scoria flow deposit, constituted by andesitic scoria (58 wt. % of SiO~2~), dacitic pumice (63 wt. % of SiO~2~), and banded scoriaceous fragments. The mineral assemblage is made of plag + opx + cpx + amph + /- Fe-Ti oxides in different proportions with disequilibrium textures. Plagioclase and matrix glass compositions are heterogeneous suggesting mixing between andesitic and dacitic magmas. Whereas Avalos is related to a dome-destruction event that produced a block-and-ash flow deposit of homogeneous dacitic composition (63-64 wt. % of SiO~2~). The mineral assemblage is made of plag + cpx + opx + amph +/- Fe-Ti oxides. However, plagioclase and matrix glass compositions are also heterogeneous suggesting a mixing between two magmas. Pressure and temperature estimations for both eruptions point to a relatively shallow dacitic reservoir (~190 MPa and ~880°C) continuously rejuvenated by hotter mafic melts coming from deeper reservoirs (~390 MPa and ~980ºC). The Jamapa event likely occurred shortly after the contact between the mafic and felsic magmas, whereas the Avalos eruption occurred after a longer period of time since the mixing event. Our results suggest the presence of a shallower felsic magma reservoir feeded by deeper mafic magmas stored ≥ 14 km below Citlaltépetl volcano.

