# Magnetotelluric Evidence for the Deep Causes of Different Eruptive Styles of Changbaishan Tianchi and Longgang Volcanoes in Northeast China

**Lingqiang Zhao ^1,2,3^, Yan Zhan^3^, Duygu Kiyan^2,4^, Jiandong Xu^5^, Yaxuan Hu ^1^, Ji Tang^3^, Xiangyu Sun ^3^, Qingliang Wang^1^ and Cong Cao^1^**

<!-- more -->> - **Affiliations:**  ^1^The Second Monitoring and Application Center, China Earthquake Administration, Xi'an 710043, China ^2^DIAS -- Geophysics Section, School of Cosmic Physics, Dublin Institute for Advanced Studies, 5 Merrion Square North, Dublin 2, Ireland. ^3^State Key Laboratory of Earthquake Dynamics, Institute of Geology, China Earthquake Administration, Beijing, China, ^ ^ ^4^iCRAG -- The SFI Research Centre in Applied Geosciences, O'Brien Centre for Science (East), University College Dublin, Belfield, Dublin 4, Ireland ^5^Jilin Changbaishan Volcano National field scientific observation and research station, Institute of Geology, China Earthquake Administration, Beijing 100029, China 

> - **Presentation type:** Poster

> - **Presentation time:** [Thursday 16:30 - 18:30](../sessions_comparison.md#__tabbed_3_6), [Room Poster Hall](../maps_venue.md#__tabbed_1_1)

> - **Poster Board Number:** [197](../map_poster_boards.md#thursday)

> - **Programme No:** 1.8.28

> - [Theme 1](../theme1.md) > [Session 8](../sessions/session-1-8.md)

--- 

:fontawesome-solid-book: **Abstract**

Northeast China contains a large number of intraplate volcanic clusters, the Changbaishan volcanic system (CVS) is the largest in scale among them. Since these volcanoes are far from plate boundaries, the magmatic plumbing systems and the formation mechanisms of these intraplate volcanoes are still under debate. The broad CVS includes the Changbaishan Tianchi Volcano (CTV) (also known as the Paektu/Baekdu Volcano in North Korea), and Longgang Volcano (LGV). LGV and CTV share a common magmatic source at mantle depths. However, the two volcanoes have produced completely different types of eruptions. By performing 3D inversion of an MT dataset that completely covers the LGV and CTV, we have obtained high-resolution electrical resistivity images. The results reveal that the two volcanoes have distinct magmatic plumbing systems, and this is likely the reason for their different eruptive styles. Results from 3D modeling do not show a magma chamber in the shallow crust beneath LGV, interpreted as the rapid rise of the magma from the mantle is responsible for producing a series of densely distributed volcanic cones in the LGV field. In contrast, there is a magma chamber in the upper crust beneath the CTV, where the fractional crystallization and mixing of magma has occurred. This magma chamber has facilitated multiple centralized eruptions, and thereby has led to the formation of the large CTV volcanic cone. These results indicate that differences in their crustal structures may have controlled the different eruptive activities of the LGV and CTV in CVS, Northeast China.

