# A novel in-situ method to track the redox evolution of magmatic systems

**^^Charline Lormand^^ ^1^, Enzo-Enrico Caccatiore^1^, Nils B. Gies^2^, David A. Neave^3^, Zoltan Zajacz^1^, Luca Caricchi^1^**

<!-- more -->> - **Affiliations:** ^1^Department of Earth Sciences, University of Geneva, Rue des Maraîchers 13, 1205 Geneva, Switzerland (charline.lormand@unige.ch); ^2^Institute of Geological Sciences, University of Bern, Baltzerstrasse 1+3, 3012 Bern, Switzerland; ^3^Department of Earth Sciences, University of Manchester, United-Kingdom 

> - **Presentation type:** Poster

> - **Presentation time:** [Thursday 16:30 - 18:30](../sessions_comparison.md#__tabbed_3_6), [Room Poster Hall](../maps_venue.md#__tabbed_1_1)

> - **Poster Board Number:** [224](../map_poster_boards.md#thursday)

> - **Programme No:** 1.9.31

> - [Theme 1](../theme1.md) > [Session 9](../sessions/session-1-9.md)

--- 

:fontawesome-solid-book: **Abstract**

Magma redox, often expressed as oxygen fugacity (*f*O~2~), plays a significant role in metal and sulfur transport in magmas. Oxidised conditions increase (1) copper transfer efficiency from magma to fluid in mineralising systems, and (2) magma viscosity and explosive potential in volcanic systems. The ferric-to-total-iron ratio (Fe^3+^/ΣFe) is used as a proxy to estimate the magmatic *f*O~2~. However, quantifying Fe^3+^/ΣFe often involves high analytical costs, limited accessibility, and sample damage. The novel Soft X-ray Emission Spectrometer (SXES) implemented on an electron probe microanalyser enables precise measurement of Fe-La, Fe-Lblines, and thus Fe^3+^/ΣFe once the instrument is calibrated on matrix-matched materials measured by Mössbauer or X-ray absorption near edge structure (XANES) spectroscopy.
Here, we present novel, *in-situ* Fe^3+^/ΣFe determinations from silicate minerals (clinopyroxene and amphibole) and glasses (natural and experimental) previously characterised by Mössbauer spectroscopy and XANES [1-4]. Silicate phases from controlled-*f*O~2~experiments of medium-K calc-alkaline basaltic and shoshonitic compositions are also presented to develop new oxybarometers. Caveats due to bonding effects such as non-linearity between the iron content and soft X-ray line properties will be discussed. This novel method allows the characterisation of the redox~ ~evolution of magmatic systems, adding a new dimension to our understanding of magmatic processes and the factors controlling the formation of ore deposits.
[1] Cottrell & Kelley (2011), EPSL 305(3-4), 270-282. [2] Cottrell et al. (2009), Chem. Geol. 268(3-4), 167-179. [3] Kelley & Cottrell (2009), Science, 325(5940), 605-607. [4] Neave et al. (2024), CMP 179(5).

