# Plumbing system processes unravelled through phenocryst texture, chemistry and in-situ Sr isotopes - The Pleiades Volcanic Field (Antarctica)

**^^Alice Tomassini^^ ^1-2^, Irene Rocchi^1^, Matteo Masotta^1-3^, Maurizio Petrelli^4^, Mónica Ágreda-López^4^, Teresa Ubide^5^, Sergio Rocchi^1-3^**

<!-- more -->> - **Affiliations:** ^1^ Dipartimento di Scienze della Terra, Università di Pisa, Pisa, Italia; ^2^ Department of Environmental Sciences, Informatics and Statistics, Università \"Ca\' Foscari\" di Venezia, Venezia, Italia; ^3 ^Center for Instrument Sharing CISUP, Università di Pisa, Pisa, Italia; ^4 ^Dipartimento di Fisica e Geologia, Università di Perugia, Perugia, Italia. ^5 ^School of Earth and Environmental Sciences, The University of Queensland; Brisbane, Australia. 

> - **Presentation type:** Poster

> - **Presentation time:** [Thursday 16:30 - 18:30](../sessions_comparison.md#__tabbed_3_6), [Room Poster Hall](../maps_venue.md#__tabbed_1_1)

> - **Poster Board Number:** [202](../map_poster_boards.md#thursday)

> - **Programme No:** 1.9.9

> - [Theme 1](../theme1.md) > [Session 9](../sessions/session-1-9.md)

--- 

:fontawesome-solid-book: **Abstract**

The Pleiades Volcanic Field (PVF), in northern Victoria Land, Antarctica, is made up of a dozen monogenetic scoria cones and two domes, with ages ranging from ca. 800 ka to present. Despite the monogenetic aspect of the edifices, the volcanic products are compositionally diverse, defining a complete mildly Na-alkaline evolutionary trend. This makes the PVF a distinctive volcanic field, whose plumbing system has likely evolved under special conditions. To unravel the architecture of the PVF feeding system, we characterized the chemistry, texture and P-T conditions of crystallisation of the crystal cargo of a set of lavas, sampled in the framework of the Italy's National Antarctic Research Program - PNRA. Moreover, we performed in-situ Sr isotopes determinations on plagioclase crystals and groundmass with laser ablation multi-collector mass spectrometry (LA-MC-ICP-MS). Plagioclase phenocrysts display a wide range of textures (dusty mantles, coarse sieve textures, rounded cores), coupled with zonings in major (e.g. Ca-Na), trace elements (e.g. Ba) and Sr ratio (ranging in 0.7036-0.7043).  Results on plagioclase suggest efficient recycling of crystals between magmas differing in evolution degree and radiogenic isotope signatures, as well as mixing with a low ^87^Sr/^86^Sr basaltic magma in the most mafic terms of the association. The complexity of pre-eruptive processes suggests a prolonged stall of the magma at crustal depths (1.2-0.1 GPa), with a main storage zone at around 0.3 GPa, probably due to an incapability of eruption. We suggest that a variable ice load could have played a role in modulating this long-lived and vertically extended subvolcanic system.

