# Origin of Silicic Magmatism at the Katla Volcanic Complex, South Iceland

**Valentin R. Troll^1,2^, Frances M. Deegan^1,2^, Jussi S. Heinonen^3,4^, Caroline Svanholm^1^, Chris Harris^5^,  Christian M. Lacasse^6^, Harri Geiger^7^, Agata Poganj^1^, Malin Andersson^1^, Romain Meyer^8^, Thorvaldur Thordarson^9^**

<!-- more -->> - **Affiliations:** ^1^Uppsala University, Dept. of Earth Sciences, Natural Resources & Sustainable Development, Uppsala, Sweden; ^2^Centre for Natural Hazards and Disaster Science (CNDS), Uppsala University, Sweden; ^3^Åbo Akademi University, Geology and Mineralogy, Åbo, Finland; ^4^University of Helsinki, Department of Geoscience and Geography, Helsinki, Finland; ^5^University of Cape Town, Department of Geological Sciences, South Africa; ^6^SQN 412, Bloco M, Apt. 105, Asa Norte, CEP: 70867-130, Brasília, DF, Brazil; ^7^Institute of Earth and Environmental Sciences, University of Freiburg, Freiburg im Breisgau, Germany; ^8^Service géologique du Luxembourg, Bertrange, Luxembourg; ^9^University of Iceland, Faculty of Earth Sciences, Iceland 

> - **Presentation type:** Talk

> - **Presentation time:** [Thursday 16:15 - 16:30](../sessions_comparison.md#__tabbed_3_1), [Room S150](../maps_venue.md#__tabbed_1_2)

> - **Programme No:** 1.9.7

> - [Theme 1](../theme1.md) > [Session 9](../sessions/session-1-9.md)

--- 

:fontawesome-solid-book: **Abstract**

The Katla volcano is a bimodal caldera complex within Iceland's basalt-dominated Eastern Volcanic Zone. To unravel the petrogenesis of silica-rich rocks from Katla, we provide new δ^18^O values for almost 60 basaltic, intermediate, and high-silica eruptive rocks, including a number of partially melted felsic xenoliths. The basaltic samples display a range in bulk-rock δ^18^O values from +4.3 to +8.5‰ (n=17) and the sparse intermediate samples from +4.1 to +5.9‰ (n=3). In turn, silicic rock samples and feldspar separates range from +2.7 to +6.4‰ (n=38), whereas the felsic xenoliths yield the lowest values from -4.9 to -2.3‰ (n=4). The majority (95%) of the Katla silicic volcanics have δ^18^O values below typical MORB (ie. ≤ 5.0‰), ruling out an origin via closed-system fractional crystallisation from the basaltic magmas. We utilised the new δ^18^O values to model possible assimilation and fractional crystallisation (AFC) scenarios. The results indicate an early stage of FC/AFC at deep- to mid-crustal levels, followed by assimilation of low-δ^18^O hydrothermally-altered sub-volcanic materials similar to the low-δ^18^O felsic xenoliths at shallow crustal levels. Such a two-stage magma evolution is consistent with available geophysical and geobarometry studies at Katla, indicating mid- to deep-crustal as well as shallow-crustal magma domains. Importantly, mafic rocks show dominantly MORB-like δ^18^O values, whereas low δ^18^O values occur essentially in silicic rocks only. This implies that the low-δ^18^O values at Katla are imposed by interaction with Icelandic crust, rather than reflecting low δ^18^O in the underlying mantle sources.

