# Template matching for identification of hydro-acoustic signals to monitor underwater eruptions

**^^Lise Retailleau^1,2^^^ , Michel Frangieh^1,2,^ Jean-Marie Saurel^1^, Valérie Ferrazzini^1,2^**

<!-- more -->> - **Affiliations:** ^1^Institut de Physique du Globe de Paris, CNRS, Université Paris Cité, 1 rue Jussieu, F-75005 Paris, France ^2^Observatoire volcanologique du Piton de la Fournaise, Institut de Physique du Globe de Paris, 14 RN3 - Km 27, F-97418 La Plaine des Cafres, La Réunion, France

> - **Presentation type:** Talk

> - **Presentation time:** [Thursday 16:00 - 16:15](../sessions_comparison.md#__tabbed_3_3), [Room R280](../maps_venue.md#__tabbed_1_1)

> - **Programme No:** 2.1.2

> - [Theme 2](../theme2.md) > [Session 1](../sessions/session-2-1.md)

--- 

:fontawesome-solid-book: **Abstract**

Volcanic eruptions predominantly occur underwater, but the study of these eruptions remains a significant challenge due to limited site accessibility and the lack of continuous high-resolution data. Consequently, the temporal processes driving the construction of submarine volcanic edifices remain poorly understood. From 2018 to early 2021, one of the largest recorded submarine eruptions occurred 50 km east of Mayotte, in the Mozambique Channel, leading to the birth of the Fani Maoré volcano.
The Fani Maoré eruption presents a rare opportunity to study submarine volcanic dynamics. Form early 2019 to the end of the eruption, ocean bottom seismometers (OBS) deployed offshore Mayotte have recorded hydro-acoustic signals generated by the eruptive activity. These signals provide unprecedented temporal precision for tracking volcanic activity and lava flow emplacement.
In this work, we employ template matching to detect impulsive hydro-acoustic signals from the hydrophone component of the OBS dataset. Templates are constructed by clustering manually picked events. We then associate the detected signals with their sources to reconstruct the spatio-temporal variability of eruptive activity. This approach enables us to highlight key phases of the eruption, offering new insights into submarine volcanic processes and paving the way for continuous, high-resolution monitoring of underwater eruptions.

