# How can we constrain connections between volcanic seismic signals and eruptive behaviour at Mt Etna?

**^^Jade Eyles^1^^^ , William Frank^1^, Piero Poli^2^, Salvatore Alparone^3^**

<!-- more -->> - **Affiliations:** ^1^Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA; ^2^University of Padova, Padova, Italy; ^3^Istituto Nazionale di Geofisica e Vulcanologia, Sezione di Catania, Catania, Italy

> - **Presentation type:** Talk

> - **Presentation time:** [Friday 11:15 - 11:30](../sessions_comparison.md#__tabbed_4_2), [Room S160](../maps_venue.md#__tabbed_1_2)

> - **Programme No:** 2.1.7

> - [Theme 2](../theme2.md) > [Session 1](../sessions/session-2-1.md)

--- 

:fontawesome-solid-book: **Abstract**

Volcanic seismicity is a powerful indicator of activity at volcanoes worldwide, providing information on volcanic structures and subsurface processes such as magmatic fluid transport. Volcanic systems produce a range of eruptive styles and durations; determining whether future eruptions will be explosive or effusive is key for reducing the hazards faced by local communities. Mt. Etna is the largest volcano in Europe and is continuously monitored by a substantial seismic network providing an ideal location to quantitatively constrain links between eruptive styles and seismicity.
During periods of intense volcanic activity, many seismic events will go undetected. Repeating earthquakes are events that have identical waveforms, implying they are from the same source origin and mechanism. A matched filter search identifies repeats of template events, including those which are hidden behind the noise, and can increase a seismic catalogue by a factor of 10. Separating seismicity into families of similar waveform properties, provides a way to monitor how the seismic signal evolves through time, building a framework that can be linked to subsurface processes and eruptive styles.
Here we focus on a flank eruption in December 2018 which saw a large increase in seismicity during the first few days of the eruption. We use events detected by the INGV seismic catalogue in December 2018 as templates for a matched filter search. We investigate spatial and temporal trends in families grouped by waveform similarity to understand subsurface processes and structures, providing a quantitative comparison with the vast and complex eruptive history of Mt. Etna.

