# Characteristic of the 2023-2024 Eruption of Marapi Volcano

**Dannie Hidayat^1)^, Heruningtyas D. Purnamasari^2)^, Christina Widiwijayanti^1)^, Ahmad Basuki^2)^, Yizhou Lou^1)^, Benoit Taisne^1)^, Ahmad Rifandi^2)^**

<!-- more -->> - **Affiliations:**  ^1)^Earth Observatory of Singapore, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore ^2)^Centre for Volcanology and Geological Hazard Mitigation, Geological Agency, Bandung, Indonesia 

> - **Presentation type:** Poster

> - **Presentation time:** [Thursday 16:30 - 18:30](../sessions_comparison.md#__tabbed_3_6), [Room Poster Hall](../maps_venue.md#__tabbed_1_1)

> - **Poster Board Number:** [105](../map_poster_boards.md#thursday)

> - **Programme No:** 2.1.15

> - [Theme 2](../theme2.md) > [Session 1](../sessions/session-2-1.md)

--- 

:fontawesome-solid-book: **Abstract**

After a 5-years repose, Marapi Volcano in West Sumatra, Indonesia, erupted in two distinct phases. The first phase, spanning January to February 2023, was marked by a series of small explosions and degassing event. After a 9-months quiescence, the second phase began with a major explosion on 3 December 2023, tragically claiming the lives of 24 hikers. This eruption phase continued for over a year, featuring combination of vulcanian and strombolian activities. During the first phase, explosions were initially frequent, occurring almost hourly, but their intervals gradually lengthened until activity ceased a month later.  Early explosions produced simple seismic waveforms and high infrasound amplitudes (> 50 Pa peak-to-peak) at the summit station located 300m from the vent. Over time, the explosions became weaker, with smaller amplitude and more oscillating coda.  In contrast, the second phase has longer interval but more violent explosions, some exceeding the dynamic range of infrasound sensor located 5km away.  In the hindsight, precursory seismic swarms were observed before both eruption phases. In September 2022,  earthquakes clustered 4-5km NW of the crater at depth of 2-4km, migrating to shallower depths beneath the active vent.  Similar seismic patterns were recorded  a few months before the second phase. Tiltmeter data from summit and flank stations indicated a migrating pressure source, suggesting the magma pathway may influenced by the regional fault system. However, estimating the exact time when Marapi will enter an eruption period is still a challenge to this day.

