# Repeated dike injections beneath the Sundhnúkur crater row, Reykjanes Peninsula, Iceland, imaged by relatively relocated seismicity

**Tom Winder^1^, Elías Rafn Heimisson^1^, Thorbjörg Ágústsdóttir^2^, Egill Árni Gudnason^2^, Bryndís Brandsdóttir^1^, Nick Rawlinson^3^, Jan Burjánek^4^, Jana Doubravová^4^, Tomáš Fischer^5^, Pavla Hrubcová^4^, Kristín Jónsdóttir^6^, Eva P. S. Eibl^7^**

<!-- more -->> - **Affiliations:** ^1^Institute of Earth Sciences, University of Iceland, Reykjavík, Iceland; ^2^Iceland GeoSurvey (ÍSOR), Reykjavík, Iceland; ^3^Department of Earth Sciences, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK; ^4^Institute of Geophysics, Czech Academy of Sciences, Prague, Czechia; ^5^Charles University, Faculty of Science, Prague, Czechia; ^6^Icelandic Meteorological Office, Reykjavík, Iceland; ^7^Institute of Geosciences, University of Potsdam, Potsdam, Germany 

> - **Presentation type:** Poster

> - **Presentation time:** [Thursday 16:30 - 18:30](../sessions_comparison.md#__tabbed_3_6), [Room Poster Hall](../maps_venue.md#__tabbed_1_1)

> - **Poster Board Number:** [117](../map_poster_boards.md#thursday)

> - **Programme No:** 2.1.27

> - [Theme 2](../theme2.md) > [Session 1](../sessions/session-2-1.md)

--- 

:fontawesome-solid-book: **Abstract**

Between November 2023 -- January 2025 there have been eight dike intrusions and seven fissure eruptions beneath Sundhnúkur, on the Reykjanes Peninsula, Iceland. Geodetic and geochemical analyses show that these have been fed by a common source, located at 3-4 km depth beneath the harnessed Svartsengi geothermal area. This remarkable sequence of magmatic activity has been marked by abundant seismicity. Relative quiescence on the Peninsula following the July-August 2023 Fagradalsfjall eruption was interrupted in late October by elevated seismicity and surface uplift measured at Svartsengi, 8 km further west. As during inflation episodes at Svartsengi in 2020 and 2022, intense shallow seismicity accompanied the deformation, dominantly consisting of strike-slip faulting above an inferred sill.
From around 15:00 on 10^th^ November 2023, intense migrating seismicity and rapid metre-scale horizontal deformation marked the intrusion of a NNE-SSW oriented dike, which reached approximately 15 km length in just 8 hours, and propagated under the town of Grindavík, which was evacuated. On 18^th^ December, similar (though smaller amplitude) signals marked a second, smaller intrusion, but in contrast this dike quickly breached the surface and culminated in a 4 km long fissure eruption. A similar pattern has repeated in the following 12 months, with cyclical re-inflation beneath Svartsengi, and repeated dike intrusions and fissure eruptions along a common lineament. Through analysis of high-resolution relative relocations of the dike-induced seismicity, we investigate the relative geometry of the repeated dike intrusions, and the relationship between the seismicity and distribution of dike opening and location of eruption onset.

