# Comparing seismoacoustic signals and volcanic emissions from the 2023 explosive eruption sequence of Shishaldin Volcano, Alaska

**^^Karenna Merritt^1^^^ , David Fee^1^, Darren Tan^1^, Matt Haney^2^, Andie Gomez-Patron^3^, Hannah Dietterich^2^, Taryn Lopez^1^**

<!-- more -->> - **Affiliations:** ^1^Alaska Volcano Observatory, Geophysical Institute, University of Alaska Fairbanks; ^2^U.S. Geological Survey, Alaska Volcano Observatory, Anchorage, AK; ^3^Cornell University

> - **Presentation type:** Poster

> - **Presentation time:** [Thursday 16:30 - 18:30](../sessions_comparison.md#__tabbed_3_6), [Room Poster Hall](../maps_venue.md#__tabbed_1_1)

> - **Poster Board Number:** [106](../map_poster_boards.md#thursday)

> - **Programme No:** 2.1.16

> - [Theme 2](../theme2.md) > [Session 1](../sessions/session-2-1.md)

--- 

:fontawesome-solid-book: **Abstract**

Between July 14 and November 3, 2023, Shishaldin Volcano, Alaska produced a series of 13 explosive eruptions locally monitored by three seismic and infrasound stations. The eruptions are notable for their relative similarity in seismic and infrasound amplitudes and spectral properties in the hours to days prior to the paroxysmal phases. These trends were used to monitor the eruption in real-time and help issue eruption forecasts. The eruption also produced significant volcanic ash clouds that impacted air traffic and local communities in the region. Here we compare the coeruptive seismic and infrasound signals with the volcanic emissions from the 13 explosive eruptions of Shishaldin. In particular, we investigate the seismic energy and reduced displacement between events and discuss possible physical processes that may explain their seismic similarities. Although factors such as elevated wind noise make infrasound data more challenging to analyze, we identify relationships between RMS pressure across the 13 eruptions. We compare the seismoacoustic parameters with volcanic emissions measurements for each event, such as SO2 mass, plume height and onset time as observed by satellite and webcam analysis. Preliminary results suggest a positive correlation between plume height and RMS pressure and reduced displacement, particularly among later events. The comparison of geophysical data and volcanic emissions can provide insights into the physical processes within, as well as improve eruption monitoring and forecasting for, Alaska and global stratovolcanoes like Shishaldin.

