# Tsunami hazards in the Mediterranean: A Greece-wide scoring for potentially hazardous coastal areas and volcanoes based on geomorphology and InSAR data

**^^Daniel Müller^^ ^1^, Thomas R. Walter^1^, Edgar Zorn^1^, Paraskevi Nomikou^2^, Thor Hansteen^3^**

<!-- more -->> - **Affiliations:** ^1^GFZ Helmholtz Centre for Geosciences,  Potsdam, Germany; ^2^National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, Athens, Greece; ^3^GEOMAR Helmholtz Centre for Ocean Research, Kiel, Germany

> - **Presentation type:** Poster

> - **Presentation time:** [Thursday 16:30 - 18:30](../sessions_comparison.md#__tabbed_3_6), [Room Poster Hall](../maps_venue.md#__tabbed_1_1)

> - **Poster Board Number:** [153](../map_poster_boards.md#thursday)

> - **Programme No:** 2.2.17

> - [Theme 2](../theme2.md) > [Session 2](../sessions/session-2-2.md)

--- 

:fontawesome-solid-book: **Abstract**

Multi-Marex aims to detect and assess the risk and hazard potential of tsunamis in the Mediterranean Sea. To this aim, we develop a collapse hazard-scoring system and analyze the coastal areas of the entire Aegean Sea. We use topographic data from the EU-DEM (European Digital Elevation Model) to determine the slope and elevation of coastal zones, locally complemented by high-resolution drone photogrammetry data. This geomorphological database is combined with the deformation time series from the EGMS (European Ground Motion Service) InSAR catalogues and expanded by information on potentially weakened rocks, hydrothermal alteration, or volcanic activity. It will be further linked to known fault locations and earthquake data using the Seismotectonic Atlas of Greece and evaluated in the context of the local tectonic setting. This will provide a database of information on potentially hazardous coastal areas, justified by key parameters such as ground motion, high elevations, steep slopes, and proximity to the coastline. We show that sites of high hazard scores are widely distributed, and include volcanoes, eroded cliffs, and other landforms. Our aim is to provide basic information to focus further research on sites with high hazard potential based on physical parameters.

