# Developing a compact and mobile observation package for real-time monitoring in a remote island: application in Gaua island, Vanuatu

**Ayuta Tsuge^1^, Ayumu Ishikawa^1^, Kazuya Yamakawa^2^, Janvion Cevuard^3^, Sandrine Cevuard^3^, Ricardo William^3^, Athanase Worwor^3^, John Jr. Niroa^3^, Fukashi Maeno^1^, Mie Ichihara^1^**

<!-- more -->> - **Affiliations:** ^1^Earthquake Research Institute, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan; ^2^Mount Fuji Volcanic Disaster Center, Research Institute, Yamanashi Prefectural Government, Yamanashi, Japan; ^3^Vanuatu Meteorology and Geohazards Department, Port Vila, Vanuatu 

> - **Presentation type:** Poster

> - **Presentation time:** [Thursday 16:30 - 18:30](../sessions_comparison.md#__tabbed_3_6), [Room Poster Hall](../maps_venue.md#__tabbed_1_1)

> - **Poster Board Number:** [168](../map_poster_boards.md#thursday)

> - **Programme No:** 2.2.32

> - [Theme 2](../theme2.md) > [Session 2](../sessions/session-2-2.md)

--- 

:fontawesome-solid-book: **Abstract**

Installing a permanent monitoring network is difficult in some volcanoes, especially those in remote islands. The lack of monitoring capability would prevent scientists and authorities from rapidly and accurately evaluating volcanic activity and transferring information to the public during a crisis. It also increases the risk of working at the volcanoes. To improve these situations, we are developing a quasi-real-time seismic observation package that is easy to install. The package consists of commercially available instruments: a digitizer (Minimus+, Güralp), a short-period seismometer, a mobile router, and LIPO batteries. We can access the data stored in the SD card on the digitizer through the Güralp server using "Güralp Discovery" software from everywhere. We implemented the quasi-real-time monitoring system with a Python script, which automatically downloads the data via HTTP and uploads seismograph drums to a website for monitoring.
We installed the package in one and a half hours of onsite work in Gaua Island, Vanuatu, and tested it for October 5--9, 2024, when a geological survey was conducted. No other monitoring stations had been working there. The system used the Digicel line and was operated from Port Vila, Vanuatu, and Tokyo, Japan. The monitoring website was also accessible from the survey team in Gaua. Although we lost the data flow on the second day, we kept monitoring the digitizer's condition remotely, from which we infer that the malfunction was due to overheating. The seismic time series data were successfully recorded on the SD card throughout the experiment.

