# Evidence of mass-wasting and large flank-collapse at Fogo, Cape Verde: New insights from marine geophysical data

**^^Emma Hadré^^ ^1^, Elodie Lebas^2^, Janne Scheffler^3^, Elisa Klein^3^, Rachel Barrett^1,4^, Andreas Klügel^5^, Steffen Kutterolf^3^, Ricardo Ramalho^6^, Morelia Urlaub^3^, Sebastian Krastel^1^**

<!-- more -->> - **Affiliations:** ^1^Institute of Geosciences, Christian-Albrechts-Universität zu Kiel, Kiel, Germany; ^2^Université Paris Cité, Institut de Physique du Globe de Paris, Paris, France; ^3^GEOMAR Helmholtz Centre for Ocean Research, Kiel, Germany; ^4^Monterey Bay Aquarium Research Institute, Moss Landing, USA; ^5^Faculty of Geosciences, University of Bremen, Bremen, Germany; ^6^School of Earth and Environmental Sciences, Cardiff University, Cardiff, UK

> - **Presentation type:** Poster

> - **Presentation time:** [Thursday 16:30 - 18:30](../sessions_comparison.md#__tabbed_3_6), [Room Poster Hall](../maps_venue.md#__tabbed_1_1)

> - **Poster Board Number:** [156](../map_poster_boards.md#thursday)

> - **Programme No:** 2.2.20

> - [Theme 2](../theme2.md) > [Session 2](../sessions/session-2-2.md)

--- 

:fontawesome-solid-book: **Abstract**

Gravitational instabilities are recurrent processes affecting volcanic islands during their lifetime. Flank collapses, as a result of instability, can trigger secondary failures and tsunamis that may cause damage to coastal and offshore infrastructure. A complex history of mass-wasting events has been described in the Cape Verde Archipelago using marine geophysical datasets, including the ca. 73 ka Monte Amarelo flank collapse at Fogo which triggered a mega-tsunami. To better understand the emplacement of the submarine Monte Amarelo debris avalanche deposits and the interplay between landslides, intrusions and volcanism, we investigated high-resolution multichannel seismic (MCS) reflection data gathered in 2019 during the research cruise M155 onboard R/V METEOR. The internal architecture of the Monte Amarelo deposits as captured by the MCS data, in combination with high-resolution bathymetric data, allows precise estimates of their volume and extent and helps us to decipher its emplacement and impact on pre-existing sediments. MCS data covering Fogo's southern volcaniclastic apron show multiple mass-wasting events coinciding with volcanic intrusions and associated faulting. These deposits are predominantly located above high-amplitude reflector packages, which we interpret to represent increased input of volcaniclastic material. In combination with ongoing work on sediment cores, we aim to establish a chronological timeframe of landslide processes in the Cape Verde Archipelago and estimate recurrence periods. Our results contribute to the understanding of flank collapse and mass-wasting at volcanic islands, and their relation to tectonic and volcanic activity, along with improving hazard assessments and monitoring at unstable volcanoes.

