# 2023-2024 inflation-deflation cycles at Svartsengi and repeated dike injections and eruptions at the Sundhnúkur crater row, Reykjanes Peninsula, Iceland

**^^Michelle Parks^^ ^1^, Vincent Drouin^1^, Freysteinn Sigmundsson^2^, Ásta Rut Hjartardóttir^1^, Halldór Geirsson^2^, Gro B. M. Pedersen^1^, Joaquin M. C. Belart^3^, Sara Barsotti^1^, Chiara Lanzi^1^, Kristín Vogfjörd^1^, Andrew Hooper^4^, Benedikt Ófeigsson^1^, Sigrún Hreinsdóttir^5^, Einar Bessi Gestsson^1^, Ragnar H. Þrastarson^1^, Páll Einarsson^2^, Valentyn Tolpekin^6^, Drew Rotheram-Clarke^7^, Sydney R. Gunnarsson^3^, Birgir V. Óskarsson^3^, Virginie Pinel^8^**

<!-- more -->> - **Affiliations:** ^1^Icelandic Meteorological Office, Reykjavik, Iceland; ^2^Nordic Volcanological Center, Institute and Faculty of Earth Sciences, University of Iceland, Reykjavik, Iceland; ^3^Natural Science Institute of Iceland, Urriðaholtsstræti 6-8, 210 Garðabær, Iceland; ^4^COMET, School of Earth and Environment, University of Leeds, UK; ^5^GNS Science, Lower Hutt, New Zealand; ^6^ICEYE OY, Maarintie 6, 02150 Espoo, Finland; ^7^Geological Survey of Canada, Pacific Division, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada; ^8^CNRS, IRD, Université Gustave Eiffel, Université Grenoble Alpes, University of Savoy Mont Blanc, Grenoble, France.

> - **Presentation type:** Poster

> - **Presentation time:** [Friday 16:30 - 18:00](../sessions_comparison.md#__tabbed_4_6), [Room Poster Hall](../maps_venue.md#__tabbed_1_1)

> - **Poster Board Number:** [43](../map_poster_boards.md#friday)

> - **Programme No:** 2.3.29

> - [Theme 2](../theme2.md) > [Session 3](../sessions/session-2-3.md)

--- 

:fontawesome-solid-book: **Abstract**

Since 2020 a series of inflation-deflation cycles have occurred in the center of the Svartsengi volcanic system, SW-Iceland. Since 27 October 2023, continuous inflation has been interrupted by deflation periods when nine dike injections and seven eruptions have occurred from 10 November 2023 to 8 December 2024 at the Sundhnúkur crater row and its extension. Geodetic modelling, assuming a deformation source within a uniform elastic half-space, infers pressure changes between about 3-6 km depth, with inflow causing volume increase rates of 3-8 m^3^/s. The deflation periods began rapidly triggering a dike propagation from the northeastern edge of the Svartsengi magma domain. Geodetic modelling has been undertaken in near real-time utilizing rapid estimates of ground displacements mapped by GNSS (Global Navigation Satellite System) geodesy, using deformation sources in fixed locations. Additional geodetic inversions also use extensive interferometric analysis of synthetic aperture (InSAR) satellite images. These results have been used to map the locations and volumes of the intruded dikes and the concurrent volume drop in the magma domain. Since 27 October 2023, we infer continuous inflow of magma from depth into the magma domain, which appears to continue even during outflow into dikes and the extrusion of lava flows. We analyze all the inflation-deflation cycles, to better understand the mechanisms controlling the activity. The relationship between volume loss in the magma domain during these events and subsequent volume recharged to the reservoir (before the next event is triggered) has allowed success in forecasting diking/eruption onset in the medium and short term.

