# On-demand Sentinel-1 Interferogram Generation Service for Monitoring of Volcano Deformation

**^^Raphael Grandin^^ ^1^, Marie Boichu^2^, Théo Mathurin^3^, Nicolas Pascal^3^, Roland Akiki^4^, Jérémy Anger^4^, Carlo de Franchis^4^**

<!-- more -->> - **Affiliations:** ^1^Institut de physique du globe de Paris, Univ. Paris Cité, UMR 7154, Paris, F-75005, France; ^2^CNRS, Laboratoire d\'Optique Atmosphérique, UMR 8518, Lille, F-59000, France; ^3^ICARE Data and Services Center, CNRS, CNES UMS 2877, Univ. Lille, Lille, F-59000, France; ^4^Kayrros SAS, Paris, F-75009, France

> - **Presentation type:** Poster

> - **Presentation time:** [Friday 16:30 - 18:00](../sessions_comparison.md#__tabbed_4_6), [Room Poster Hall](../maps_venue.md#__tabbed_1_1)

> - **Poster Board Number:** [48](../map_poster_boards.md#friday)

> - **Programme No:** 2.3.34

> - [Theme 2](../theme2.md) > [Session 3](../sessions/session-2-3.md)

--- 

:fontawesome-solid-book: **Abstract**

Sentinel-1 interferograms today represent standard information to assess the extent and magnitude of ground deformation in volcanic areas. However, in spite of an open-access data distribution policy, rapid Sentinel-1 InSAR processing remains a challenge due to the large size of Interferometric Wide (IW) SAFE products.
 
Institut de physique du globe de Paris (IPGP) and Université de Lille are developing an online open-access service for on-demand computation of Sentinel-1 interferograms focused on volcanic areas, accessible through a web application. InSAR calculation relies on the EOS-SAR Python library developed at Kayrros. EOS-SAR implements an accurate Sentinel-1 geometric model accounting for fine timing corrections, which allows to get native co-registration and stitching of bursts, resulting in a time series of well-aligned, geometrically consistent, Sentinel-1 bursts mosaics. The processing can be restricted to arbitrarily small AOIs, within a single or a few consecutive bursts or adjacent sub-swaths, which saves time, computing resources and storage space. The service leverages the Copernicus Data Space Ecosystem (CDSE) S3 object storage service for efficient data access.
 
Anticipated end-users of the service include volcano observatory teams, scientists and researchers from academia and students training in the field of volcanology and remote sensing.
 
The Sentinel-1 interferogram generation service for volcanic areas is developed as part of the "Volcano Space Observatory" platform, funded in the framework of the Horizon Europe, EOSC FAIR-EASE project (Grant 101058785), led by the French Research Infrastructure "Data Terra".

