# Cost-effective GNSS for volcano deformation monitoring: A case study on Saba in the Caribbean Netherlands

**Elske van Dalfsen^1,2^, Andreas Krietemeyer^1^**

<!-- more -->> - **Affiliations:** ^1^Royal Netherlands Meteorological Institute (KNMI), R&D Seismology and Acoustics, Utrechtseweg 297, De Bilt, 3731 GA, The Netherlands ^2^Delft University of Technology, Geoscience & Remote Sensing, Stevinweg1, Delft, 2628 CN, The Netherlands

> - **Presentation type:** Poster

> - **Presentation time:** [Friday 16:30 - 18:00](../sessions_comparison.md#__tabbed_4_6), [Room Poster Hall](../maps_venue.md#__tabbed_1_1)

> - **Poster Board Number:** [35](../map_poster_boards.md#friday)

> - **Programme No:** 2.3.21

> - [Theme 2](../theme2.md) > [Session 3](../sessions/session-2-3.md)

--- 

:fontawesome-solid-book: **Abstract**

Volcano geodesy is considered a critical component of volcano monitoring, but the high cost of equipment often limits the deployment of a ground-based monitoring network. In regions where volcanic hazards are significant, particularly in developing nations, the use of affordable, alternative equipment can be especially beneficial. In this context, we evaluate the use of cost-effective dual-frequency GNSS units for deformation monitoring.
Four cost-effective GNSS units, composed of an Ardusimple "Survey GNSS Multiband antenna" and an "u-blox ZED F9P" receiver, were deployed on Saba, a volcanic island in the Caribbean Netherlands. They are easy to install, enabling rapid setups in hazardous areas, with a total cost of < €1,000 per unit---a fraction of the cost of a conventional GNSS station. Each unit includes all necessary components for stand-alone operation, and the PCB schematics, materials list, and software are publicly available. 
The GNSS data of the cost-effective units can be processed operationally, either as a stand-alone monitoring network or as an expansion of an existing monitoring network. The daily positioning performance of the cost-effective units is comparable to that of conventional GNSS stations on the island, with standard deviations of 2-4 mm for the horizontal and 6-9 mm for the vertical components.
We encourage the deployment of cost-effective GNSS units for volcano monitoring, to increase the density of the monitoring network or in hazardous environments where rapid installation is crucial. Finally, these units can be operated as a stand-alone network in budget constrained regions where volcano monitoring is essential.

