# Ground Deformation Patterns in Tenerife (Canary Islands) Revealed by Time-Series Analysis of DInSAR SBAS and Independent Component Analysis of the 2004 and 2024 Unrest Episodes

**Monika Przeor^1^, Luca D'Auria^1,2^, Susi Pepe^3^, Pietro Tizzani^3^, Andrea Barone^3^, Andrea Vitale^3^,Raffaele Castaldo^3^ and Nemesio M. Pérez^1,2^**

<!-- more -->> - **Affiliations:** ^1^ Instituto Volcanológico de Canarias (INVOLCAN), Puerto de la Cruz, Canary Islands, Spain. ^2^ Instituto Tecnológico y de Energías Renovables (ITER), Granadilla de Abona, Tenerife, Spain. ^3^ Istituto per il Rilevamento Elettromagnetico dell'Ambiente (IREA-CNR), Napoli, Italy 

> - **Presentation type:** Poster

> - **Presentation time:** [Friday 16:30 - 18:00](../sessions_comparison.md#__tabbed_4_6), [Room Poster Hall](../maps_venue.md#__tabbed_1_1)

> - **Poster Board Number:** [55](../map_poster_boards.md#friday)

> - **Programme No:** 2.3.41

> - [Theme 2](../theme2.md) > [Session 3](../sessions/session-2-3.md)

--- 

:fontawesome-solid-book: **Abstract**

In 2004-2005, an anomalous seismic activity occurred in Tenerife, the island most populated of the Canary Archipelago. Since 2016, it exhibited again increased seismicity and heightened volcanic manifestations. Analysis of ground deformation using Envisat satellite data from 2003 to 2010, combined with the Independent Component Analysis (ICA) statistical tool, revealed a ground deformation on a few centimetres within the Teide-Pico Viejo volcanic complex. This deformation was modelled and attributed to an ellipsoidal deformation source beneath the Teide-Pico Viejo volcanoes, likely related to hydrothermal activity.
In 2023-2025, the same volcanic area experienced a renewed ground deformation.To investigate the source of the observed anomalies in the Teide-Pico Viejo stratovolcano and compare its current behaviour with that observed in 2004-2005, we performed a DInSAR SBAS time-series analysis using data from the Sentinel-1 sensor. We selected ascending and descending orbits, sampling data from January to December 2024. The SBAS dataset quality was improved using detailed ICA decomposition to remove signal components unrelated to volcanic ground deformation. The component representing a clear ground deformation pattern was subsequently modelled to identify the position and geometry of the deformation source.
We observe that ground deformation was concentrated in the stratovolcano area, with values approximating 3 cm/year of ground displacement. The ICA decomposition identified the deformation pattern responsible for the observed ground displacement in the Teide-Pico Viejo volcanic complex. Modelling the ICA pattern is a critical step in understanding the source of the observed behaviour and determining whether its origin is magmatic or hydrothermal.

