# Temporal Evolution of Crustal Stress and Seismicity at Volcanoes During Periods of Unrest

**^^Eric Newland^^ ^1,2^, Christopher Kilburn^1,2^**

<!-- more -->> - **Affiliations:**  ^1^UCL Hazard Centre, Department of Earth Sciences, UCL, London, UK; ^2^Project FEVER, UKRI, UK. 

> - **Presentation type:** Talk

> - **Presentation time:** [Monday 14:30 - 14:45](../sessions_comparison.md#__tabbed_1_2), [Room S160](../maps_venue.md#__tabbed_1_2)

> - **Programme No:** 2.4.12

> - [Theme 2](../theme2.md) > [Session 4](../sessions/session-2-4.md)

--- 

:fontawesome-solid-book: **Abstract**

Eruptions that occur at volcanoes after periods of quiescence are difficult to forecast. Pathways that connect the source to the surface may have become sealed. The pressurisation of the source leads to the deformation of the crust. Initially the crust deforms elastically, strain is accommodated via ground movement and elastic strain energy is stored to the crust. Then, the deformation transitions to inelastic where strain is accommodated via brittle failure (volcano-tectonic event), and elastic strain energy is transferred from the crust. We present a novel method to estimate the temporal evolution of elastic strain energy and bulk stress during periods of unrest. We consider the transfer of energy using measurements of surface deformation and seismic activity. We evaluate the temporal evolution of crustal bulk stress and investigate the progression of deformation in the crust. We apply our method to the unrest at the Campi Flegrei caldera, Italy from 2011-2024. Our calculations reveal that the bulk stress follows a characteristic progression, in which the stress initially increases linearly with time prior to the onset of significant seismicity, consistent with elastic deformation. We then observe a transition to inelastic deformation, when rate of elastic strain energy lost via fracturing increases and eventually exceeds the rate of elastic strain energy transferred to the crust. This results in a decrease in the bulk stress stored in the crust with time. Comparison with laboratory experiments show the behaviour is consistent with bulk failure in extension and the potential formation of new pathways in the crust.

