# The July, 2024 Hydrothermal Explosion at Black Diamond Pool in Yellowstone National Park: The Scientific Response and What We've Learned

**Jamie Farrell^1^, Lauren Harrison^2^, Phillip Kondracki^2^, Mara H. Reed^3^, Jefferson D.G. Hungerford^4^, Kiernan F. Folz Donahue^4^, Michael P. Poland^5^, Alex M. Iezzi^5^**

<!-- more -->> - **Affiliations:** ^1^Department of Geology and Geophysics, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT, USA; ^2^Department of Geosciences, Colorado State University, Fort Collins, CO, USA; ^3^Department of Earth and Planetary Science, University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, CA, USA; ^4^Yellowstone Center for Resources, Yellowstone National Park, USA; ^5^U.S. Geological Survey, Cascades Volcano Observatory, Vancouver, WA, USA

> - **Presentation type:** Talk

> - **Presentation time:** [Monday 09:30 - 09:45](../sessions_comparison.md#__tabbed_1_2), [Room S160](../maps_venue.md#__tabbed_1_2)

> - **Programme No:** 2.4.5

> - [Theme 2](../theme2.md) > [Session 4](../sessions/session-2-4.md)

--- 

:fontawesome-solid-book: **Abstract**

On July 23, 2024, one of the largest historical hydrothermal explosions in Yellowstone National Park occurred at Black Diamond Pool in the Biscuit Basin hydrothermal area. The explosion sent a plume of rock, steam, liquid water, and mud 100-200 meters into the air with many visitors bearing witness and capturing dramatic videos. The boardwalk next to Black Diamond Pool was heavily damaged by the ejected mud and rocks, yet luckily nobody was injured. The closest permanent seismic station to the explosion was 4 km away and did not record any definitive signal. The visibility of the event and accessibility of the location motivated a robust response with the goals of a better understanding of this hazard, as well as the potential to inform ongoing efforts towards forecasting future hydrothermal explosions. Immediately after the event, scientists collected continuous temperature data of the thermal spring and the surrounding ground, mapped the ballistic debris field and water surge areas, deployed 35 geophones to collect continuous seismic data around Biscuit Basin, installed a 4-microphone infrasound array and acquired thermal and optical images from an Uncrewed Aircraft System. Here we present observations and preliminary analyses which suggest that the 2024 Biscuit Basin explosion was probably caused by self-sealing of the shallow hydrothermal system, causing pressure to build until it exceeded the strength of the overlying rock. Post-explosion monitoring data show that dozens of smaller explosions have occurred with varying sizes and amounts of ejected rocks and water, demonstrating a continuing hazard.

