# Long-term volcano-tectonic unrest on the Reykjanes peninsula: Europe\'s unique natural laboratory for studying the depth-dependent interaction of magmatic and tectonic processes

**Thomas R. Walter^1,2^, Egill Árni Gudnason^3^, Ólafur G. Flóvenz^4^, Gylfi Páll Hersir^4^, Torsten Dahm^1,2^, Philippe Jousset^1^, Maria Hurley^1,2^, Alina V. Shevchenko^1^, Pinar Buyukakpinar^1^, Marius Isken^1^, Martin Zimmer^1^, Bettina Strauch^1^, Magnús Tumi Gudmundsson^5^, Beatrice Giuliante^1,6^, Thorbjörg Ágústsdóttir^3^, Mahdi Motagh^1^, Eva P. S. Eibl^2^, Gesa Petersen^1^, Simone Cesca^1^, Sebastian Hainzl^1^, Jana Doubravová^6^, Jan Burjánek^6^**

<!-- more -->> - **Affiliations:** ^1^GFZ, Telegrafenberg, 14473 Potsdam, Germany; ^2^Institute of Geosciences, University Potsdam, 14476 Potsdam, Germany; ^3^ Iceland GeoSurvey (ÍSOR), Urdarhvarf 8, Kópavogur, 203, Iceland; ^4^Independent researchers; ^5^University of Iceland; ^6^Institute of Geophysics, Czech Academy of Sciences

> - **Presentation type:** Poster

> - **Presentation time:** [Monday 16:30 - 18:30](../sessions_comparison.md#__tabbed_1_6), [Room Poster Hall](../maps_venue.md#__tabbed_1_1)

> - **Poster Board Number:** [257](../map_poster_boards.md#monday)

> - **Programme No:** 2.4.34

> - [Theme 2](../theme2.md) > [Session 4](../sessions/session-2-4.md)

--- 

:fontawesome-solid-book: **Abstract**

Volcano-tectonics delves into the intricate interplay between volcanic and tectonic activity. The detailed mechanisms governing how magmatic intrusions form, migrate, and interact with the crust remain largely enigmatic. The Reykjanes Peninsula in southwest Iceland is a natural laboratory for studying volcano-tectonic phenomena. This region, sculpted by oblique rifting, active volcanism and geothermal processes, lies along the divergent tectonic boundary of the North American and Eurasian plates. Since 2020, after almost 800 years of volcanic quiescence, new magmatic intrusions have spurred a major international collaboration supported by the Hazard Assessment and Risk Team (HART) project. Between 2021 and 2023, four intrusions and three volcanic eruptions occurred at Fagradalsfjall, followed by nine volcano-tectonic events at the Sundhnúksgígar crater row within the Svartsengi volcanic system from 2023 to 2024. These events provided an unprecedented opportunity to observe volcano-tectonic processes in real time. Using state-of-the-art tools and methods, including fiber optic cables, seismic networks, repeated gravity surveys, satellite and drone radar imaging, hyperspectral cameras, machine learning, and modeling techniques; we've captured the region's volcano-tectonic activity in unprecedented detail. Our findings illuminate critical processes, including the connectivity between magma reservoirs and the feeding system at the brittle-ductile transition zone at around 6 km depth, transtensional fault reactivation amplified at topographic highs, continuous sinkhole formation, and the re-filling of an active shallow magma domain. This suggests that the Reykjanes Peninsula is Europe's leading hub for volcano-tectonic research. We show examples of how this unique lab advances our understanding of processes and their complex interactions.

