# Volcano monitoring challenges in an active Quaternary monogenetic volcanic province in western Saudi Arabia

**Fawaz Muqeem^1^, Abdel Rahman Al-Sweigh ^1^, Mahmoud Ashour ^1^, Khaled Abdel Hafez ^1^, Turki Habilel ^1^, Károly Németh ^1,2,3^**

<!-- more -->> - **Affiliations:** ^1^ National Program of Earthquakes and Volcanoes, Geohazard Centre, Saudi Geological Survey (SGS), Jeddah, Saudi Arabia, ^2^ Volcanic Risk Solutions, Massey University, Palmerston North, New Zealand, ^3^ Lithosphere Research Group, Institute of Earth Physics and Space Science, Sopron, Hungary 

> - **Presentation type:** Poster

> - **Presentation time:** [Monday 16:30 - 18:30](../sessions_comparison.md#__tabbed_1_6), [Room Poster Hall](../maps_venue.md#__tabbed_1_1)

> - **Poster Board Number:** [246](../map_poster_boards.md#monday)

> - **Programme No:** 2.4.28

> - [Theme 2](../theme2.md) > [Session 4](../sessions/session-2-4.md)

--- 

:fontawesome-solid-book: **Abstract**

Al-Madinah Al-Munawwarah is a city with approximately 1.5 million residents, which doubles during major pilgrimage periods. The city is located in the northern part of the Arabian Shield and is surrounded by three active, low-recurrence Quaternary monogenetic volcanic fields. To the north of the city lies Harrat Khaybar, a lava-dominated volcanic field. Harrat Al-Madina, where the city is situated, is part of the extensive northern tip of Harrat Rahat. On the western side is Harrat Lunayyir, which experienced volcano-seismic unrest in 2009 due to a failed eruption. These volcanic eruptions are among the most significant monogenetic volcanic field formations in the world. Harrat al-Madinah, located south of the city, is one of the most volcanically active areas in the region. Geological mapping has identified more than thirteen volcanic eruptions over the past five thousand years, equating to a major lava-emitting volcanic eruption every four hundred years on average. The most recent volcanic eruption in the Arabian Peninsula occurred in the year 654 AH (1256 CE), resulting in a 2.3 km-long fissure. This historical context underscores the potential impact that a similar eruption could have on the modern urban environment. It highlights the necessity for an effective volcanic hazard monitoring and mitigation strategy, which is managed by the Saudi Geological Survey's National Program for Earthquakes and Volcanoes. To enhance monitoring capabilities and mitigate volcanic risks, seismic and specific volcanic monitoring stations are being integrated into the geohazard monitoring network of the Saudi Geological Survey.

