# Low-Cost Photogrammetry Technique That Uses a Locally Defined Coordinate System to Model Meter-Scale Cavities or Vertical Features

**^^Mya Thomas^^ , Alison Graettinger**

<!-- more -->> - **Affiliations:** Division of Natural & Built Environment, University of Missouri-Kansas City, Kansas City, Missouri, United States

> - **Presentation type:** Poster

> - **Presentation time:** [Monday 16:30 - 18:30](../sessions_comparison.md#__tabbed_1_6), [Room Poster Hall](../maps_venue.md#__tabbed_1_1)

> - **Poster Board Number:** [135](../map_poster_boards.md#monday)

> - **Programme No:** 3.1.27

> - [Theme 3](../theme3.md) > [Session 1](../sessions/session-3-1.md)

--- 

:fontawesome-solid-book: **Abstract**

Photogrammetry is a useful technique in geoscience to generate three-dimensional models of geologic targets for detailed quantification. The proposed low-cost alternative relies on a local coordinate system to compensate for the challenge of collecting accurate GPS coordinates. This method is particularly useful to measure vertical surfaces, subsurface cavities, or other features at the meter-scale. Typical photogrammetry methods include the use of an unmanned aerial vehicle or terrestrial LiDAR technology. These methods can be impractical when GPS-based ground control points are challenging to define due to limited access, flight restrictions, or the target feature being underground. The proposed method uses 7.5-centimeter wooden cubes to define a coordinate grid within or around the feature of interest. X, Y, and Z coordinates are defined from an origin cube and photographs are captured then processed in AgiSoft Metashape to generate a digital three-dimensional model. This technique was executed to model three <2-meter diameter lava tubes (MT009, MT011, and MT012) in the 1961 lava flow at Askja, Iceland. The average percent errors of these lava tube models are as low as 5%, demonstrating the efficacy of the method in capturing subsurface cavities with high accuracy. This technique demonstrates an inexpensive approach to digitally model meter-scale geologic targets that are inaccessible. The generated models are proven to yield accurate measurements which enables detailed quantification that doesn't require physical revisitation.

