# Impact of volcanic SO2-rich plumes on vegetation health

**Megan Udy^1^, Susanna Ebmeier^1^, Sebastian Watt^2^, Andy Hooper^1^**

<!-- more -->> - **Affiliations:** ^1^School of Earth and Environment, University of Leeds, Leeds, UK; ^2^School of Geography, Earth and Environmental Sciences, University of Birmingham, Edgbaston, Birmingham, UK

> - **Presentation type:** Talk

> - **Presentation time:** [Monday 08:45 - 09:00](../sessions_comparison.md#__tabbed_1_1), [Room S150](../maps_venue.md#__tabbed_1_2)

> - **Programme No:** 3.1.2

> - [Theme 3](../theme3.md) > [Session 1](../sessions/session-3-1.md)

--- 

:fontawesome-solid-book: **Abstract**

While health and atmospheric effects of volcanic gases have been well studied, the direct impacts of gas laden plumes on their surrounding ecosystems are comparatively understudied. Of particular interest are the impacts of volcanic SO~2~ on the health of surrounding forests. Although industrial SO~2~ impacts on vegetation have been studied there is a lack of research in volcanic settings. Here, we present a novel remote sensing method to track vegetation health and recovery at multiple tropical volcanoes.
We use optical vegetation indices and radar remote sensing to analyse vegetation health and recovery response post exposure to SO~2~ rich volcanic plumes. Our data demonstrate a rapid decline in vegetation health (a decrease of up to 0.7 in NDVI), indicating SO~2~ exposure resulting in damage to the photosynthetic processes of adjacent forests. The post-exposure recovery is rapid (recovering in as little as 5 months), particularly for that level of detected decline in vegetation health, suggesting the damage is dominated by SO~2~ impacts rather than ash. These rapid recovery rates have potential to provide insight into vegetation resilience in volcanic settings.
This method, while enhancing understanding of SO~2~ related vegetation impacts, is also a novel tool for volcano monitoring as we can detect and map the unique response of vegetation to volcanic SO~2~. We suggest that this method can aid to safely track plume trajectory and identify areas of concentrated gas exposure, thus understanding the impacts, through time, of volcanic eruptions on their surrounding ecosystems.

