# Rapid LA-ICP-MS measurement of trace elements in volcanic glasses for petrologic monitoring

**Adam J.R. Kent^1^, Kendra J. Lynn^2^, Drew T. Downs^2^, Chris J. Russo^1^, Charles T. Lewis^1^, Matthew W. Loewen^3^**

<!-- more -->> - **Affiliations:** ^1^Oregon State University; ^2^Hawaiian Volcano Observatory, U.S. Geological Survey; ^3^Alaska Volcano Observatory, US Geological Survey

> - **Presentation type:** Poster

> - **Presentation time:** [Monday 16:30 - 18:30](../sessions_comparison.md#__tabbed_1_6), [Room Poster Hall](../maps_venue.md#__tabbed_1_1)

> - **Poster Board Number:** [150](../map_poster_boards.md#monday)

> - **Programme No:** 3.1.42

> - [Theme 3](../theme3.md) > [Session 1](../sessions/session-3-1.md)

--- 

:fontawesome-solid-book: **Abstract**

Recent eruptions of Hawaiian volcanoes and elsewhere show the usefulness of rapid geochemical analysis for monitoring. This approach relies on making measurements on more rapid timeframes than traditionally associated with geochemical analyses, requiring adjustments to protocols and workflows.
We present results from simulated rapid-turnaround laser ablation ICP-MS (LA-ICP-MS) measurements of trace elements in glasses from recent eruptions of Kīlauea volcano, Hawaiʻi. LA-ICP-MS is well suited to rapid analysis due to the speed of individual measurements, analytical versatility, and simplicity of data processing, and can rapidly provide data for 25+ elements to help constrain changes in magma compositions and sources. Measurements used a modified workflow to minimize analysis time. This includes ablating small glass chips placed on double sided-tape, rather than polished epoxy mounts, and data reduction without a separate electron microprobe measurement for the internal standard.  
Analysis of 14 glass samples from 9 eruptions between1974-2025, in two different sessions, took <5 hours from sample preparation through to the completion of data processing. Over 90% of laser spots returned useable spectra. Results using CaO or TiO~2~ as the internal standard are largely comparable to those made on conventional polished samples. Some volatile elements (Si, Pb, Cs, Rb) show greater uncertainties and variability, interpretated as elemental fractionation related to complex sweep gas flow around glass chips. This also precludes the use of SiO~2~ as an internal standard. Overall, results support the use of LA-ICP-MS for rapid turnaround measurements to support eruption monitoring and response.

