# Amphibole machine learning thermobarometry and chemometry: a general model for igneous rocks

**Martín Miranda-Muruzábal^1^, Oliver Higgins^2^, Luca Caricchi^1^**

<!-- more -->> - **Affiliations:**  ^1^ Department of Earth Sciences, University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland; ^2^ School of Earth and Environmental Sciences, University of St Andrews, St Andrews, UK 

> - **Presentation type:** Poster

> - **Presentation time:** [Monday 16:30 - 18:30](../sessions_comparison.md#__tabbed_1_6), [Room Poster Hall](../maps_venue.md#__tabbed_1_1)

> - **Poster Board Number:** [145](../map_poster_boards.md#monday)

> - **Programme No:** 3.1.37

> - [Theme 3](../theme3.md) > [Session 1](../sessions/session-3-1.md)

--- 

:fontawesome-solid-book: **Abstract**

Amphibole thermobarometry and chemometry models can provide quantitative information on the geometry and evolution of a broad variety of igneous systems. However, the chemical complexity of amphibole has hindered many previous attempts to calibrate robust, broadly applicable models; the ability of machine learning (ML) to unravel complexities in large datasets makes it a powerful tool for addressing this challenge.
Here we develop a new ML amphibole-only thermobarometer and chemometer that incorporates the latest advancements in ML thermobarometry and is trained on a significantly expanded training dataset (>800 experimental amphibole-melt pairs) compared to the ML thermobarometer and chemometer developed by Higgins et al. (2022). Before calibration, this dataset was rigorously filtered using various statistical techniques, a stage often overlooked in earlier ML studies.
The model includes both traditional and novel methods to describe uncertainty associated with each pressure (*P*), temperature (*T*) and melt composition (*X~melt~*) estimate. Additionally, it outputs the experimental amphibole and liquid compositionally closest to each natural amphibole, enabling users to consult the corresponding experimental paper to verify other geochemical features and critically assess the *P-T-X~melt~* estimate. Moreover, this allows users to reference the article/s with the best matching experimentally synthesised amphiboles.
To validate the model, its performance is compared against widely applied amphibole thermometers and barometers (e.g., the amphibole-plagioclase thermometer and Al-in-hornblende barometer) as well as amphiboles from granites with known emplacement pressures. Finally, we apply our new calibration to amphibole-bearing intrusive fragments from the Lesser Antilles island arc, refining the previously reported *P-T-X~melt~* stratification of the crust.

