# The Miniature Multispectral Thermal infrared Camera (MMT-gasCam) for volcanic monitoring: Laboratory calibration and first field data

**^^Evan Collins^^ ^1^, James Thompson^2^, Daniel Williams^1^, Michael Ramsey^1^**

<!-- more -->> - **Affiliations:** ^1^University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, United States ^2^University of Texas at Austin, Austin, Texas, United States 

> - **Presentation type:** Poster

> - **Presentation time:** [Monday 16:30 - 18:30](../sessions_comparison.md#__tabbed_1_6), [Room Poster Hall](../maps_venue.md#__tabbed_1_1)

> - **Poster Board Number:** [159](../map_poster_boards.md#monday)

> - **Programme No:** 3.1.51

> - [Theme 3](../theme3.md) > [Session 1](../sessions/session-3-1.md)

--- 

:fontawesome-solid-book: **Abstract**

The Miniature Multispectral Thermal infrared Camera (MMT-gasCam) for gas retrievals was designed to detect volcanic SO~2~, ash, and aerosols from a ground-based platform. The camera system has a long lineage that pairs thermal infrared (TIR) filters with small commercial off-the-shelf TIR camera cores. This camera is housed in a weatherproof tripod-mounted head connected to power and data storage in an external case. The MMT-gasCam expands upon past instrument development by employing two wheels, each housing six filters to greatly improve the spectral resolution. As each wheel spins, the camera continually collects raw image data, which are separated by filter, calibrated to surface radiance, and converted to temperature and emissivity, from which plume species compositions are retrieved. Unlike other TIR-based systems designed for spectral analyses that either have low spectral resolution or are too heavy for rigorous field campaigns, the MMT-gasCam benefits from having a high spatial and spectral resolution and is portable by one person. With this versatility, the camera is deployable at locations either near volcanic vents or from distances of several kilometers to capture the entire plume. Laboratory calibration is performed using a microgroove high-precision blackbody plate that maintains temperatures from 273 to 393 ±0.5 K. Retrievals are conducted by releasing gases in front of the plate at known flow rates. Recent internal structural updates to the camera have made it possible to endure more rigorous field conditions. Here we present the laboratory calibration and validation, as well as initial field-based data collection of the MMT-gasCam.

