# Onland-offshore tectono-stratigraphic reconstruction of the Campi Flegrei caldera: deciphering the interplay between volcanism, deformation and collapse in the last 15 kyr

**^^Jacopo Natale^^ ^1^, Stefano Vitale^2^, Roberto Isaia^3^**

<!-- more -->> - **Affiliations:** ^1^ Department of Earth and Geoenvironmental Sciences, University of Bari \"Aldo Moro\", Italy; ^2^ Department of Earth, Environmental and Resources Sciences, University of Naples \"Federico II\", Italy; ^3^ Istituto Nazionale di Geofisica e Vulcanologia - Osservatorio Vesuviano

> - **Presentation type:** Poster

> - **Presentation time:** [Friday 16:30 - 18:00](../sessions_comparison.md#__tabbed_4_6), [Room Poster Hall](../maps_venue.md#__tabbed_1_1)

> - **Poster Board Number:** [220](../map_poster_boards.md#friday)

> - **Programme No:** 3.10.19

> - [Theme 3](../theme3.md) > [Session 10](../sessions/session-3-10.md)

--- 

:fontawesome-solid-book: **Abstract**

Volcanic fields have a remarkable connection between structural features and volcanism. This is particularly enhanced by the presence of caldera structures, that tend to confine the spatial distribution of vents and control the sedimentation of primary pyroclastic and volcaniclastic sediments, especially in the case of partially submerged volcanoes. All these features accurately describe the volcano-tectonic evolution of the Campi Flegrei caldera (southern Italy). Here, through the integration of surface geology, reinterpretation of well-log data and offshore data we reconstructed the shallow tectono-stratigraphic architecture of the caldera. Using representative geological cross-sections we illustrate the main volcano-tectonic sectors characterized by the prevalence of pyroclastic and/or marine sediments, as well as the presence of volcanic vents, volcano-tectonic collapse, nested caldera structure and the central resurgent dome. The analysis of the main reference surface and their thickness show that the maximum marine ingression only partially involved the nested caldera, forming horseshoe branches to the east, south and west. The presence of the earliest monogenetic vents approximates the position of the neo-formed Neapolitan Yellow Tuff caldera. These inferred features are hindered by the activity of volcano-tectonic faults and younger volcanic activity. All features indicate a post-caldera deformation evolution characterized by a central resurgent dome and the coeval activity of faults, both along the rim and in the central sector. These results may represent the base for a comprehensive assessment of the structure of this volcanic area opening the way to a more accurate framework to interpret its dynamics.

