# The Solfatara eruption of Campi Flegrei (Italy): combining field, textural and geochemical data to understand the dynamics of small-volume volcanic events at active calderas

**^^Andrea Todde^^ ^1^, Bianca Scateni^2^, Roberto Isaia^3^, Marija Voloschina^1^, Paola Marianelli^1^, Antonella Bertagnini^4^, Raffaello Cioni^5^, Marco Pistolesi^1^**

<!-- more -->> - **Affiliations:** ^1^Dipartimento di Scienze della Terra, Università di Pisa, Pisa, Italy; ^2^Istituto Nazionale di Geofisica e Vulcanologia, Sezione di Roma, Rome, Italy; ^3^Istituto Nazionale di Geofisica e Vulcanologia, Sezione di Napoli, Osservatorio Vesuviano, Naples, Italy; ^4^Istituto Nazionale di Geofisica e Vulcanologia, Sezione di Pisa, Pisa, Italy; ^5^Dipartimento di Scienze della Terra, Università di Firenze, Florence, Italy 

> - **Presentation type:** Talk

> - **Presentation time:** [Friday 09:30 - 09:45](../sessions_comparison.md#__tabbed_4_4), [Room R290](../maps_venue.md#__tabbed_1_1)

> - **Programme No:** 3.10.5

> - [Theme 3](../theme3.md) > [Session 10](../sessions/session-3-10.md)

--- 

:fontawesome-solid-book: **Abstract**

The 4.3 ka Solfatara eruption (Campi Flegrei, Italy) provides valuable insights into the eruption mechanisms and scenarios of small-volume explosive volcanic events at active calderas that host long-lived hydrothermal systems. In this study, we present results from the stratigraphic analysis of the Solfatara tephra deposits, alongside a detailed characterization of the physical, textural and chemical properties of the erupted juvenile products.
The Solfatara deposit sequence is divided into two stratigraphic units, each corresponding to a distinct eruptive phase. Unit 1 predominantly consists of bedded ash deposits that exhibit clear signs of hydrothermal alteration. In contrast, Unit 2 is characterized by massive to cross-bedded ash deposits and by massive lapilli-bearing layers. The ash deposit extends up to approximately 10 km NE of the crater. Proximal outcrops include lithic-rich breccia deposits and ballistic shower beds, abundant in Unit 2.
Component and textural analyses reveal that Unit 1 contains only 10--20% of dense to moderately vesicular juvenile glass, with the rest of the particles being hydrothermally altered lithics. In Unit 2, juvenile content ranges from 30% to >50%, with predominantly vesicular textures. The juvenile material has a homogeneous phonolitic-trachytic composition in both units, indicating that the eruption originated from a common magma batch.
Overall, our findings suggest that Unit 1 formed during low-energy explosions primarily driven by fluid expansion within the hydrothermal system, with some contribution from the ascending magma. In contrast, Unit 2 formed during a phase characterized by multiple, transient events, including explosion breccia events, mainly driven by magma fragmentation.

