# Insights into Caldera Collapse Mechanics and Outstanding Questions from the 2018 Kīlauea Event

**Paul Segall^1^, Taiyi Wang^2^,  Josh Crozier^1^, Mark Matthews^3^, Kyle Anderson^4^, Enrique del Castillo^5^**

<!-- more -->> - **Affiliations:** ^1^Geophysics Department, Stanford University, Stanford CA, USA; ^2^Geological and Planetary Sciences, Caltech, Pasadena CA, USA; ^3^Walden Consulting, Pittsfield MA, USA; ^4^U.S. Geological Survey Volcano Science Center, Moffett Field, CA, USA,  ^5^Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, Stanford University,  Stanford CA, USA

> - **Presentation type:** Poster

> - **Presentation time:** [Thursday 16:30 - 18:30](../sessions_comparison.md#__tabbed_3_6), [Room Poster Hall](../maps_venue.md#__tabbed_1_1)

> - **Poster Board Number:** [49](../map_poster_boards.md#thursday)

> - **Programme No:** 3.11.9

> - [Theme 3](../theme3.md) > [Session 11](../sessions/session-3-11.md)

--- 

:fontawesome-solid-book: **Abstract**

The 2018 Kīlauea eruption provided unique constraints on caldera collapse. High-rate effusion decreased pressure within the magma reservoir, causing the shear stress on the ring fault to increase. Eventually, frictional resistance was overcome, leading to collapse, re-pressurization the underlying magma. Continuum models of ring-fault development (using Smooth Particle Hydrodynamics) are consistent with the inferred magma pressure drop at the onset of collapse.
Extra-caldera GNSS and tilt data are consistent with abrupt co-collapse pressure increases followed by exponential decay due to magma outflow, *although the signature of faulting is difficult to isolate*.  *Significant uncertainties in the summit magma storage geometry, including the role of a distinct "south caldera reservoir remain.  *
Volcano tectonic (VT) seismicity increased between collapses. GPS data from 2 sites (CALS, NPIT) within the caldera subsided proportional to cumulative seismicity counts.  This strongly suggest that most VT seismicity was driven by creep and/or distributed shear.  *However, VT seismicity is not completely localized, and first-motions inconsistent with double-couple sources.*  Seismicity was concentrated on newer ring-fault segments, suggesting fault roughness was important.  Seismicity rate, and the relative frequency of large VTs increased dramatically in the minutes before collapses.
Inter-collapse subsidence at CALS & NPIT is consistent with rate-strengthening friction, but VTs and VLP nucleation require unstable friction.  This implies heterogeneities and high-speed fault weakening during collapses.  The final collapse cycle started unremarkably, although with a relatively low seismicity.  *Whether the end of the eruption resulted from changes in the magmatic system, or the fault system is not settled.*

