# Small scale caldera collapse - A numerical study on central vent caldera-foming eruptions

**Pascal Aellig^1^, Albert de Montserrat^2^, Boris Kaus^1^**

<!-- more -->> - **Affiliations:** ^1^Institute of Geosciences, Johannes Gutenberg - University, Mainz, Germany; ^2^Department of Earth and Planetary Sciences, ETH Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland

> - **Presentation type:** Poster

> - **Presentation time:** [Thursday 16:30 - 18:30](../sessions_comparison.md#__tabbed_3_6), [Room Poster Hall](../maps_venue.md#__tabbed_1_1)

> - **Poster Board Number:** [51](../map_poster_boards.md#thursday)

> - **Programme No:** 3.11.11

> - [Theme 3](../theme3.md) > [Session 11](../sessions/session-3-11.md)

--- 

:fontawesome-solid-book: **Abstract**

Large-scale magmatic systems are commonly associated with catastrophic caldera-forming eruptions. These events are generally linked to faults or eruption channels located at the periphery of the magma chamber, resulting in a caldera that reflects the full spatial extent of the reservoir. However, the dynamics of small to intermediate -scale magmatic systems that have also hosted caldera-forming eruptions, such as Krakatau (Indonesia) or Crater Lake (USA), are comparatively less explored. In these instances, the eruption is generally assumed to have begun from a single central vent of a volcanic edifice rather than through a ring fault system.
In this study, we utilise a multi-physics numerical modelling approach to investigate the mechanics of central vent eruptions on the collapse stage. The interactions between magma dynamics, far-field tectonic stresses and non-linear visco-elasto-plastic rheologies are examined using the thermo-mechanical geodynamic code *JustRelax.jl*, in order to investigate the potential for roof failure above a shallow magma chamber. The models incorporate a thermally active magma chamber with variable geometries, connected to the volcanic edifice via a conduit structure. This framework allows the simulation of upward magma flow and the progressive depletion of the chamber, thereby providing insights into the processes governing central vent-driven caldera formation.
Here we present a systematic parameter study on the driving forces behind this type of caldera collapse. 

