# GeoNet observations during the 2022-23 unrest episode at Taupō caldera volcano, Aotearoa New Zealand

**^^Oliver Lamb^1^^^ , Sigrún Hreinsdóttir^2^, William Power^2^, Stephen Bannister^2^, John Ristau^2^, Craig Miller^1^, Eleanor Mestel^3^, Finnigan Illsley-Kemp^3^, Katie Jacobs^2^, Steve Sherburn^1^, Jonathan Hanson^2^, Elisabetta D'Anastasio^2^, Eveanjelene Snee^2^, Mike Ross^2^, Ian Hamling^2^, Aleksandr Spesivtsev^2^, Jean Roger^2^, Aditya Gusman^2^, Xiaoming Wang^2^, David Burbidge^2^, Michael Rosenberg^1^, Jackson Shanks^1^, Cameron Asher^1^, Karen Britten^1^, Richard Johnson^1^**

<!-- more -->> - **Affiliations:** ^1^Te Pū Ao \| GNS Science, Wairakei Research Centre, Taupō, 3384, New Zealand; ^2^Te Pū Ao \| GNS Science, Avalon Campus, Lower Hutt, 5010, New Zealand; ^3^Te Kura Tātai Aro Whenua School of Geography, Environment and Earth Sciences, Te Herenga Waka Victoria University of Wellington, PO Box 600, Wellington, 6140, New Zealand

> - **Presentation type:** Poster

> - **Presentation time:** [Thursday 16:30 - 18:30](../sessions_comparison.md#__tabbed_3_6), [Room Poster Hall](../maps_venue.md#__tabbed_1_1)

> - **Poster Board Number:** [50](../map_poster_boards.md#thursday)

> - **Programme No:** 3.11.10

> - [Theme 3](../theme3.md) > [Session 11](../sessions/session-3-11.md)

--- 

:fontawesome-solid-book: **Abstract**

Lake Taupō in the North Island of Aotearoa New Zealand hosts a large caldera volcano that most recently erupted ~1800 years ago. The volcano has experienced ~16 unrest episodes since 1872. In May 2022 the volcano entered a new episode with increased earthquake activity and ground deformation. This episode was notable for two reasons: (1) the Volcanic Alert Level for Taupō was raised to 1 for the first time, and (2) a M5.7 on 30^th^ November 2022 was accompanied by a small tsunami in the lake. Here we give an overview of seismic, geodetic, and tsunami observations during the unrest and what was inferred to have occurred during the unrest.
Over 1780 earthquakes were detected beneath the lake over 13 months, the highest number recorded during instrumented unrest episodes at the volcano. Four distinct activity phases were identified, with earthquake relocations showing that the activity was focussed on overlapping caldera structures beneath the lake. A rapid 50 mm/yr inflation was detected within the lake, peaking during the M5.7 earthquake with 18 cm uplift and 25 cm horizontal movement recorded. GNSS data modelling suggested the inflation source was located at 4-8 km depth beneath the lake. Analysis of relative water-level gauge and survey data indicated the lake tsunami was generated by two sources: a sub-lacustrine landslide near the town of Taupō, and the rapid upward movement of the lakebed. Altogether, we suggest the 2022-23 Taupō unrest episode was caused by a new intrusion of magma at depth.

