# The Proper Orthogonal Decomposition (POD) applied to thermal infrared and visible low-cost cameras images in different volcanic contexts

**^^Dario Stelitano^^ ^(1)^, Vincenzo Carbone^(2)^, Fabio Lepreti^(2)^, Vincenzo Capparelli^(2)^, Leonardo Primavera^(2)^, Lorenzo Guerrieri^(1)^, Stefano Corradini^(1)^, Luca Merucci^(1)^, Camilo Naranjo^(1)^**

<!-- more -->> - **Affiliations:** ^1^Istituto Nazionale di Geofisica e Vulcanologia, Rome, Italy; ^2^Department of Physics, University of Calabria, Rende, Italy

> - **Presentation type:** Poster

> - **Presentation time:** [Thursday 16:30 - 18:30](../sessions_comparison.md#__tabbed_3_6), [Room Poster Hall](../maps_venue.md#__tabbed_1_1)

> - **Poster Board Number:** [92](../map_poster_boards.md#thursday)

> - **Programme No:** 3.12.18

> - [Theme 3](../theme3.md) > [Session 12](../sessions/session-3-12.md)

--- 

:fontawesome-solid-book: **Abstract**

Remote sensing, both satellite and ground based, has in recent years become an increasingly important role in volcanic monitoring, thanks to improved sensors and cost-cutting of this type of instrument.
The VIRSO2 ground based system is a low-cost instrument consisting of three cameras, one working in the VISible (VIS) part of the spectrum and the other two in the thermal InfraRed (TIR) spectral range (8-14 μm). In front of one of the two TIR cameras an 8.7 μm narrowband filter is placed. From the measurements collected, the geometry of the plume, the detection and retrieval of volcanic SO2 can be obtained.
The Proper Orthogonal Decomposition (POD) is a technique extensively used in analyzing turbulent fields to decompose a generic scalar or vector field in empirical eigenfunctions and their temporal coefficients. The spatial and temporal volcanic plume dynamics is preliminarily investigated applying the proper orthogonal decomposition to the ground based measurement acquired using the VIRSO2 camera. The use of POD generates a reduced orthonormal basis to approximate thermal image fields. In these years the INGV remote sensing group were carried out many field campaigns using the VIRSO2, covering a wide spectrum of volcanic activity: eruptive (Etna, 1 April 2021), strombolian (Stromboli, May 2023) and degassing (Etna, August 2024; Popocatépetl, February 2023; Sabancaya, November 2022).  Using this technique we aim to identify and characterize the different dynamical regimes and patterns acting on the emitted volcanic plume.

