# Large explosive eruptions are dominated by pyroclastic flows instead of buoyant plumes: insights from a global data compilation

**Alice R. Paine^1^, Fabian B. Wadsworth^2^**

<!-- more -->> - **Affiliations:** ^1^Department of Environmental Sciences, University of Basel, CH-4056 Basel, Switzerland ^2^Earth and Environmental Sciences, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München, Theresienstr. 41, 80333 Munich, Germany.

> - **Presentation type:** Poster

> - **Presentation time:** [Thursday 16:30 - 18:30](../sessions_comparison.md#__tabbed_3_6), [Room Poster Hall](../maps_venue.md#__tabbed_1_1)

> - **Poster Board Number:** [81](../map_poster_boards.md#thursday)

> - **Programme No:** 3.12.7

> - [Theme 3](../theme3.md) > [Session 12](../sessions/session-3-12.md)

--- 

:fontawesome-solid-book: **Abstract**

The dynamics of Earth's largest, most voluminous eruptions (≥100 km^3^ ejecta) are poorly understood. Here, we explore the question of whether these very large eruptions can be treated as scaled up versions of moderate volume historical eruptions, or whether they should be treated as fundamentally different Earth system phenomena. To examine this, we compile fall deposit and ignimbrite volume data for 74 explosive eruptions worldwide that are magnitude 4 or greater, and use this dataset to assess how material is partitioned into buoyant plumes versus pyroclastic density currents as a function of eruption magnitude. Importantly, we filter our results by overall distance from seas/oceans, so that we can focus in on the eruptions for which preservation of the deposits is as reliable as possible. After filtering, we find that the largest eruptions are dominated by ignimbrites and not fall deposits, implying that, co-ignimbrite plumes notwithstanding, there may be little or no buoyant plume component to eruptions of the highest known magnitudes. This result is consistent with model simulations showing that the pyroclastic material produced during larger events is emplaced in density currents alone, and highlights important considerations for contemporary eruption simulations, the fate of volcanic gases relative to solid mass, and subsequent appraisals of the climatological and environmental impacts of explosive volcanism on Earth.

