# Evaluation of eruption source parameters using infrasound and plume modelling

**Silvio de Angelis^1,2^, Luciano Zuccarello^2,1^, Simona Scollo^3^, Luigi Mereu^3^ and Duccio Gheri^2^**

<!-- more -->> - **Affiliations:** ^1^School of Environmental Sciences, University of Liverpool, 4 Brownlow Street, L69 3GP, Liverpool, UK. ^2^Istituto Nazionale di Geofisica e Vulcanologia, Sezione di Pisa, via Cesare Battisti 53, 56125 Pisa, Italy. ^3^Istituto Nazionale di Geofisica e Vulcanologia -Osservatorio Etneo, Sezione di Catania, Piazza Roma 2, 95125 Pisa, Italy.

> - **Presentation type:** Poster

> - **Presentation time:** [Thursday 16:30 - 18:30](../sessions_comparison.md#__tabbed_3_6), [Room Poster Hall](../maps_venue.md#__tabbed_1_1)

> - **Poster Board Number:** [86](../map_poster_boards.md#thursday)

> - **Programme No:** 3.12.12

> - [Theme 3](../theme3.md) > [Session 12](../sessions/session-3-12.md)

--- 

:fontawesome-solid-book: **Abstract**

Volcanic ash injection into the atmosphere during eruptions poses a significant threat to aviation, making accurate forecasting of ash dispersal a priority. These forecasts rely on empirical and numerical models that require accurate estimates of eruption source parameters (ESPs), such as mass eruption rate and maximum column height.
In this study, we exploit infrasound data recorded during June 2021 eruptive activity at Mt. Etna, Italy, to assess its potential for near-real-time estimation of eruption rates. We calculate a time series of flow velocity at the vent, accounting for topographic scattering and the effects of vent geometry on acoustic source radiation. During periods of sustained paroxysmal activity, inferred flow velocities range between 50--125 m/s. Validation against independent ground-based remote sensing measurements confirms the reliability of our estimates. Using these infrasound-derived flow velocities as input for a 1D plume model, we also estimate the maximum height of the eruption column.
We demonstrate how the infrasound technology is useful for assessing eruption rates for volcanic plume models. By integrating real-time infrasound workflows with operational plume modeling, this approach could significantly enhance decision-making and risk mitigation strategies at active volcanoes.

