# Tephrostratigraphy and geochemical correlation of Mount Erciyes parasitic tephra rings with distal Mediterranean S1 Ash Records

**Ivan Sunyé-Puchol^1^, Xavier Bolós^2^\, Rengin Özsoy^1^, Efe Akkas^3^, Victoria Smith^4^, Lorenzo Tavazzani^5^, Manuela Nazarri^6^, Silvio Mollo^1,6^**

<!-- more -->> - **Affiliations:**  ^1^ Department of Earth Sciences, Sapienza University of Rome, Piazzale Aldo Moro 5, 00185, Rome, Italy; ^2^ Geoscience Barcelona (GEO3BCN), CSIC, Lluís Solé Sabarís S/N, 08028 Barcelona, Spain; ^3^ Department of Geological Engineering, Hacettepe University, Beytepe, 06800 Ankara, Turkey; ^4^ School of Archaeology, University of Oxford, 1 South Parks Road, Oxford OX1 3TG, United Kingdom; ^5^ Institute of Geochemistry and Petrology, ETH Zürich, Clausiusstrasse 25, Zurich, Switzerland; ^6^ Istituto Nazionale Di Geofisica E Vulcanologia (INGV), Sezione Di Roma1, Rome, Italy 

> - **Presentation type:** Poster

> - **Presentation time:** [Tuesday 16:30 - 18:30](../sessions_comparison.md#__tabbed_2_6), [Room Poster Hall](../maps_venue.md#__tabbed_1_1)

> - **Poster Board Number:** [146](../map_poster_boards.md#tuesday)

> - **Programme No:** 3.13.15

> - [Theme 3](../theme3.md) > [Session 13](../sessions/session-3-13.md)

--- 

:fontawesome-solid-book: **Abstract**

Mount Erciyes, the largest and one of the most active volcanoes in the Central Anatolian Volcanic Province, has produced several Quaternary eruptions, including three Holocene rhyolitic tephra rings: Karagüllü, Perikartin, and Dikkartin. These explosive eruptions occurred along regional faults and were partially destroyed by subsequent lava domes, which erupted at the end of the phreatomagmatic phases, generating block-and-ash flows. Previous attempts to constrain their chronology using cosmogenic (Sarikaya et al., 2019) and radiogenic dating (U/Th-He in zircons; Friedrichs et al., 2021) have lacked precision to determine the eruptive sequence. Therefore, we conducted a detailed tephrostratigraphic study to establish stratigraphic relationships, radiocarbon dating, and glass composition datasets (major and trace elements) for tephrochronological correlation with distal records (e.g., Mediterranean S1 tephra). Our results suggest that Karagüllü erupted first at 11,258 ± 56 cal BP, followed by Perikartin at 9700 ± 100 cal BP and Dikkartin at 9.0 ± 0.6 ka. However, no clear stratigraphic relationships between Dikkartin and the other tephra deposits were identified, and radiocarbon analyses yielded inconclusive results. Trace element analysis confirms distal Karagüllü ashes reached the Black Sea (Cullen et al., 2014). Meanwhile, Perikartin and Dikkartin, geochemically indistinguishable, are correlated with Mediterranean S1 tephra (~9 ka BP; Hamann et al., 2010). Given that Dikkartin is classified as a Plinian eruption (Ersoy et al., 2019) and its age aligns with the S1 tephra, we propose that Dikkartin corresponds to S1. However, simultaneous eruptions of Dikkartin and Perikartin remain possible. Grant PID2023-147255NB-I00 funded by MICIU/AEI/ 10.13039/501100011033.

