# Shortening wait times for volcano 'blood tests' using a correlative and collaborative hardware solution

**Matthew J Pankhurst**

<!-- more -->> - **Affiliations:** 1Gaiaxiom, Copenhagen, Denmark; 2Department of Earth Sciences, University of Geneva, Switzerland

> - **Presentation type:** Poster

> - **Presentation time:** [Tuesday 16:30 - 18:30](../sessions_comparison.md#__tabbed_2_6), [Room Poster Hall](../maps_venue.md#__tabbed_1_1)

> - **Poster Board Number:** [131](../map_poster_boards.md#tuesday)

> - **Programme No:** 3.15.36

> - [Theme 3](../theme3.md) > [Session 15](../sessions/session-3-15.md)

--- 

:fontawesome-solid-book: **Abstract**

Large-scale deployment of petrological methods during active eruptions is an increasing trend. High-frequency "blood tests"--- direct measurements of the magmas feeding an eruption---bring unique insights and forecasting potential. While time-series petrology during active eruptions is now becoming more established, it is still mainly delivered in hindsight, and similarly dense datasets of past eruptions would allow empirical comparison. Petrology is speeding up, yet listening to heartbeats (seismicity), observing breathing (geodesy), and analyzing the breath (gas geochemistry) are widely regarded as the only near-real-time monitoring methods in existence.
In parallel, advances in 3D, multi-modal X-ray imaging and rapid 2D chemical and textural analytical methods are defining a new set of opportunities for both syn-eruptive and forensic volcano petrology. An emerging trend is to characterise rocks and minerals and integrate many types of data, which promotes efficient targeting and deeper investigations into high value features. Yet, the instruments required are rarely in the same place, and typically nowhere near volcanoes.
A patented software/hardware solution has been innovated to link these trends and deliver "full spectrum blood tests" with reduced turnaround times. The Trækord system (track-record) is a set of mixed-material 3D printed components that include a variety of practical design features. These form bridges between (1) the physical sample and digital data, (2) correlation and calibration between datasets of different dimensionality, and (3) rapid handling and data acquisition across instruments and laboratories.
Implementation of Trækord systems is hypothesised to make volcano petrology more accessible, efficient, rapid, collaborative, and, ultimately, more valuable to all.

