# How can we forecast eruptions from caldera systems? A case study from Taupō

**Finnigan Illsley-Kemp^1^, Simon J Barker^1^, Eleanor RH Mestel^1^, Colin JN Wilson^1^**

<!-- more -->> - **Affiliations:** ^1^School of Geography, Environment, and Earth Science, Victoria University of Wellington, Wellington, New Zealand

> - **Presentation type:** Talk [Invited]

> - **Presentation time:** [Monday 15:45 - 16:00](../sessions_comparison.md#__tabbed_1_5), [Room R380](../maps_venue.md#__tabbed_1_1)

> - **Programme No:** 3.15.1

> - [Theme 3](../theme3.md) > [Session 15](../sessions/session-3-15.md)

--- 

:fontawesome-solid-book: **Abstract**

Forecasting the likelihood of volcanic eruptions is always challenging but it is particularly difficult at caldera systems. Often these volcanoes have no observed eruptions, and the geological record shows that they can produce a large range of eruption sizes, from lava domes to supereruptions. In 2022 Taupō caldera, New Zealand, entered a period of unrest which featured heightened seismicity and ground deformation. This prompted Taupō's Volcanic Alert Level to be raised for the first time in its history. Along with our colleagues in the NZ volcano science community, it was our responsibility to provide science advice on the likelihood of a range of eruption scenarios. This revealed fundamental gaps in our knowledge of how these systems operate in the lead up to eruption, even for a comparatively well-studied volcano like Taupō. In this talk I will discuss these knowledge gaps and suggest future avenues for research in this critical area.

