# Does incorporation of irregular bomb shapes significantly influence the outcome of ballistic hazard models?

**^^Amilea Sork^^ ^1^, Ben Kennedy^1^, Rebecca Fitzgerald^2^, Kae Tsunematsu^3^, Marina Bisson^4^, Leighton Watson^1^, Mathieu Sellier^1^, Jacopo Taddeucci^5^, Daniele Andronico^6,^ Piergiorgio Scarlato^5^, Elisabetta Del Bello^5^, Tullio Ricci^5^, Dona Banerjee^1^, Paul Kreit^1,7^**

<!-- more -->> - **Affiliations:** ^1^University of Canterbury, Christchurch, New Zealand; ^2^GNS Science, Lower Hutt, New Zealand; ^3^Yamagata University, Yamagata, Japan; ^4^Istituto Nazionale di Geofisica e Vulcanologia, Sezione Pisa, Pisa, Italy; ^5^Istituto Nazionale di Geofisica e Vulcanologia, Sezione Roma 1, Roma, Italy; ^6^Istituto Nazionale di Geofisica e Vulcanologia, Osservatorio Etneo, Catania, Italy; ^7^University of Konstanz, Konstanz, Germany

> - **Presentation type:** Talk

> - **Presentation time:** [Tuesday 09:15 - 09:30](../sessions_comparison.md#__tabbed_2_3), [Room R280](../maps_venue.md#__tabbed_1_1)

> - **Programme No:** 3.15.7

> - [Theme 3](../theme3.md) > [Session 15](../sessions/session-3-15.md)

--- 

:fontawesome-solid-book: **Abstract**

Volcanic ballistic projectiles (VBPs) are a near-vent volcanic hazard that can be frequently fatal. A critical component of VBP hazard assessment is the estimation of impact locations; this is often accomplished via physics-based computational models such as Ballista. Drag is one of the most significant physical controls on a VBP's impact location and is in turn controlled mainly by the VBP's shape, represented as a dimensionless drag coefficient C~D~. However, little has been quantified about the drag behaviour of molten VBPs (or bombs), which, especially compared to solid blocks, have irregular and often fluctuating shapes. Therefore, we present a case study comparing a modelled distribution which incorporates a C~D~ for irregularly-shaped bombs to a real-world scenario.
Firstly, we quantified the irregularity of bomb shapes. By examining high-speed video of Strombolian eruptions, we define a framework of shape definitions for bombs and a shape-size relationship. Secondly, we measured C~D~ for realistic bomb shapes. Using 3D-printed models of our bomb shape end-members, we quantify C~D~ ranges for each end-member in a wind tunnel analogue experiment. Thirdly and finally, we incorporate these results into the Ballista model using eruption parameters matching Stromboli's July 2019 paroxysm. We partition the modelled particles' C~D~s based on the size-shape distribution and incorporate our experimental drag coefficient ranges for each shape. We then compare the simulated impact distribution to the mapped distribution from Stromboli's July 2019 paroxysm and explore the influence of the bomb shape compared to other factors on the VBPs' impact locations.

