# Innovative and cost-effective instrumentation to study volcanic ash remobilisation by aeolian processes: application at Copahue volcano (Argentina)

**^^Allan Fries^1^^^ , Lucia Dominguez^1^, Pablo Forte^2,3^, Sebastian Garcia^2^, Juan Esteban Panebianco^3^, Eduardo Rossi^1^, Costanza Bonadonna^1^**

<!-- more -->> - **Affiliations:** ^1^Department of Earth Sciences, University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland; ^2^Observatorio Argentino de Vigilancia Volcánica (OAVV), Servicio Geológico Minero Argentino (SEGEMAR), Argentina; ^3^Consejo Nacional de Investigaciones Científicas y Técnicas (CONICET), Argentina; ^4^Institute for Earth and Environmental Sciences of La Pampa, Santa Rosa, Argentina 

> - **Presentation type:** Poster

> - **Presentation time:** [Tuesday 16:30 - 18:30](../sessions_comparison.md#__tabbed_2_6), [Room Poster Hall](../maps_venue.md#__tabbed_1_1)

> - **Poster Board Number:** [107](../map_poster_boards.md#tuesday)

> - **Programme No:** 3.15.12

> - [Theme 3](../theme3.md) > [Session 15](../sessions/session-3-15.md)

--- 

:fontawesome-solid-book: **Abstract**

Volcanic ash can be remobilised long after deposition, particularly under favourable conditions such as low soil moisture and sparse vegetation. This generates secondary hazards that broaden the duration and spatial extent of primary hazards, with potential adverse effects on public health, agriculture and transportation. Whilst it is generally understood that aeolian remobilisation depends principally on the characteristics of ash deposits (e.g., volume, grainsize, density) and environmental conditions (e.g., wind friction velocity, precipitations), its temporal evolution remains poorly characterised in the field. Here, we present a new instrument to study aeolian remobilisation *in situ* using inexpensive collectors and sensors. The setup consists of three wind erosions samplers built from PVC tubes (Méndez's Traps) placed at increasing heights above the ground and coupled with a variety of electronic sensors. This includes temperature, relative humidity, particulate matter (PM), and soil moisture sensors, as well as weight sensors to track the accumulation of material in the samplers, anemometers, and cameras. Arduino microcontrollers are used to enable continuous, autonomous measurements over prolonged periods. The system was first deployed at Copahue volcano (Argentina) in February 2025, where a network of instruments was installed. Regular data and sample collection form part of a citizen science initiative involving local stakeholders, enhancing both scientific insights and community engagement.  Preliminary results reveal the existence of temporal and spatial variations in aeolian processes. Long-term PM monitoring also supports air quality assessment in Caviahue, a community located ~10 km southeast of the volcano in the direction of prevailing winds.

