# Aeolian remobilisation of volcanic ash: What do we know, What do we need?

**Lucia Dominguez^1^, Pablo Forte^2^, Allan Fries^1^, Paul A. Jarvis^3^, Eduardo Rossi^1^, Leonardo Mingari^4^, Costanza Bonadonna^1^**

<!-- more -->> - **Affiliations:** ^1^Department of Earth Sciences, University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland ^2^Observatorio Argentino de Vigilancia Volcánica (OAVV), SEGEMAR, CONICET, Buenos Aires, Argentina ^3^GNS Science \| Te Pū Ao, Lower Hutt, New Zealand ^4^Geosciences Barcelona (GEO3BCN-CSIC), Barelona, Spain

> - **Presentation type:** Poster

> - **Presentation time:** [Tuesday 16:30 - 18:30](../sessions_comparison.md#__tabbed_2_6), [Room Poster Hall](../maps_venue.md#__tabbed_1_1)

> - **Poster Board Number:** [106](../map_poster_boards.md#tuesday)

> - **Programme No:** 3.15.11

> - [Theme 3](../theme3.md) > [Session 15](../sessions/session-3-15.md)

--- 

:fontawesome-solid-book: **Abstract**

Explosive volcanic eruptions can disperse large quantities of volcanic ash over vast areas. After initial deposition, ash grains can undergo aeolian remobilisation, a critical process within the life cycle of volcanic ash. Loose pyroclasts smaller than 500 µm are susceptible to being lifted by wind, with those smaller than ~ 70 μm able to become suspended under certain environmental conditions, and traveling hundred, or even thousand, of kilometres before eventually re-depositing. These intermittent but long-lasting phenomena can have significant and prolonged impacts, including health problems, aerial and terrestrial traffic disruption, damage to agriculture, and social discomfort. Accurate forecasting of these events remains a major challenge, and eruption false alarms continue to be a significant concern for monitoring institutions. Here we evaluate current field and laboratory approaches to quantify the physical parameters required to improve the description of aeolian processes and ultimately develop more reliable forecasting models of aeolian ash. Current approaches on field mapping, sample collection, particle characterization and laboratory experiments are discussed within the framework of a multidisciplinary approach integrating the aeolian dust/sand transport theory and physical volcanology. Finally, we evaluate current practices to identify the gaps where further research is needed.

