# Voluminous sediment recycling revealed by Pakistan volcanoes in the Makran arc

**^^Yunying Zhang^^ ^1^, Guangping Zeng^1,2^, Zhen Sun^1^, Mubashir Mehmood^3^**

<!-- more -->> - **Affiliations:**  ^1^Key Laboratory of Ocean and Marginal Sea Geology, South China Sea Institute of Oceanology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Guangzhou 510301, China; ^2^University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China; ^3^Dipartimento di Scienze della Terra, dell'Ambiente e delle Risorse (DiSTAR), Università degli Studi di Napoli Federico II, 80126 Napoli, Italy

> - **Presentation type:** Poster

> - **Presentation time:** [Tuesday 16:30 - 18:30](../sessions_comparison.md#__tabbed_2_6), [Room Poster Hall](../maps_venue.md#__tabbed_1_1)

> - **Poster Board Number:** [81](../map_poster_boards.md#tuesday)

> - **Programme No:** 3.16.8

> - [Theme 3](../theme3.md) > [Session 16](../sessions/session-3-16.md)

--- 

:fontawesome-solid-book: **Abstract**

The Makran arc forms by the subduction of the Arabian oceanic plate beneath the Eurasian plate. While the Makran arc features subduction of ~4200 m thick, carbon-rich sediments from the Indus fan, the validity of sediment recycling in this arc has not been tested. Three Late Miocene-Quaternary volcanoes (Koh-i-Sultan, Taftan, Bazman) that are constructed on 46-48 km thick continental basement with variable ages (Paleozoic-Eocene) and compositions provide a unique opportunity to investigate sediment recycling. New ^40^Ar-^39^Ar ages, whole-rock elemental and Sr-Nd-Pb isotope data for the Koh-i-Sultan volcano, combined with published data on the Bazman and Taftan volcanoes, reveal for the first time a strong, regional-scale binary mixing trends of Makran arc magmas in Sr-Nd-Pb isotope space and in Th/La vs. Sm/La diagram. The trends suggest an enriched mantle wedge strongly metasomatized by recycled sediments.
Within the overarching regional-scale trends, however, the individual volcanic centers display considerable compositional diversity. For example, while individual Makran arc volcanoes plot on a single sediment-mantle mixing trend in Sr-Nd isotope space, their ratios range from MORB-type to those with ^87^Sr/^86^Sr of ~0.70676 and ^143^Nd/^144^Nd of ~0.51241. Such isotopic variability can tentatively be linked to the variable sediment thickness along the Makran trench, enhanced by differences in slab dip, convergence rate and trench-to-arc distance. However, the intra-arc variability in the fractionated incompatible trace element patterns (such as Gd/Yb), suggests that the Makran volcanoes were processed in individual ways by partial melting, fractional crystallization and melt mixing during their ascent from the mantle to the surface.

