# Insights into eruption dynamics from TROPOMI/PlumeTraj-derived SO2 emissions during the 2022 eruption of Mauna Loa, Hawaiʻi

**^^Ben Esse^^ ^1^, Mike Burton^1^, Hugues Brenot^2^, Nicolas Theys^2^**

<!-- more -->> - **Affiliations:** ^1^ COMET, Department of Earth and Environmental Sciences, The University of Manchester, Manchester, UK; ^2^ Royal Belgian Institute for Space Aeronomy, Brussels, Belgium 

> - **Presentation type:** Poster

> - **Presentation time:** [Friday 16:30 - 18:00](../sessions_comparison.md#__tabbed_4_6), [Room Poster Hall](../maps_venue.md#__tabbed_1_1)

> - **Poster Board Number:** [282](../map_poster_boards.md#friday)

> - **Programme No:** 3.17.44

> - [Theme 3](../theme3.md) > [Session 17](../sessions/session-3-17.md)

--- 

:fontawesome-solid-book: **Abstract**

Volcanic fissure eruptions can produce voluminous gas emissions, posing a risk to local and distal populations and potentially impacting global climate. Quantifying the emission rate and altitude of injection of these emissions allows forecasting of impacts and provides key insights into the magma dynamics driving eruptions. Daily global observations from satellite instruments such as TROPOMI combined with trajectory modelling with PlumeTraj delivers these emission rate and altitude data.
Here, we report satellite-derived SO~2~ emissions from the 2022 eruption of Mauna Loa, which lasted only 13 days but produced an SO~2~ plume that circled the globe, displaying a highly variable emission rate and injection altitude. Three key discoveries were made: we detect precursory SO~2~ emissions up to three hours before the eruption start; peaks in emission rate are correlated with onset and cessation of activity at different fissures; the SO~2~ injection altitude was modulated by the moisture content of entrained ambient air. We suggest that alignment of the fissure geometry with the wind direction could potentially explain how the initial emissions reached 14 km asl, approaching the tropopause. The total SO~2~ measured from this eruption is 600 (± 300) kt.
These results demonstrate how satellite measurements can provide new insights into eruptive and degassing mechanisms and highlight that better constraints on the SO~2~ emissions from fissure eruptions globally are needed to understand their impact on climate.

