# Variability of the Villarrica volcano lava lake from the analysis of high-resolution satellite images and its relationship with instrumental parameters

**Gabriela Pedreros^1^, María Angélica Contreras^1^,  Francisco Bucchi^2^, Diego Coppola^3^, Francesco Massimetti^3,4^,  Oscar Valderrama^1^, Maira Figueroa^1^, Virginia Toloza^1^, Lizette Bertin^1^, Claudia Bucarey^1^**

<!-- more -->> - **Affiliations:** 1. Southern Andes Volcano Observatory, National Network of Volcanic Survillance, National Service of Mining and Geology, Temuco, Chile; 2. Geoimagen, Temuco, Chile; 3. Department of Earth Sciences, University of Torino, Italy; 4. Instituto de Geofísica y Vulcanología, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, México.

> - **Presentation type:** Talk

> - **Presentation time:** [Friday 11:15 - 11:30](../sessions_comparison.md#__tabbed_4_1), [Room S150](../maps_venue.md#__tabbed_1_2)

> - **Programme No:** 3.17.4

> - [Theme 3](../theme3.md) > [Session 17](../sessions/session-3-17.md)

--- 

:fontawesome-solid-book: **Abstract**

Villarrica volcano is considered the one with the highest specific risk according to the Ranking of active volcanoes in Chile and is recognized for having a lava lake in its crater almost permanently, being a key element in the population risk perception. During its last eruptive cycle (April 2022 - September 2024), the surface activity was monitored in real and quasi-real time with seven surveillance cameras, the morphological changes measured by processing satellite images Planet Scope and SkySat Collect; depth with DEMs constructed with Pleiades Stereo and TriStereo, and complemented with the analysis of thermal radiance anomalies (MODIS and VIIRS), allowing to recognize different types of variability of the lava lake in a temporal scale of days.
The period of greatest manifestation of the lava lake begins in November 2023, with a sudden growth that lasts for 43 days and gradually declines until June 2024. It is characterized by the permanence of the lava lake on the surface, a maximum area of 1370 m^2^ and depth fluctuations between 57 to 107 m with respect to the crater rim. This phenomenon would be triggered by magma injection at depth and subsequent re-equilibration of the magmatic column according to the relationship observed with seismic parameters, SO~2~ flux and thermal radiance. Other periods, of abrupt and sporadic  variability, generated the highest frequency of Strombolian activity. While the highest emissions of pyroclasts show a relationship with periods of decreased magma buoyancy.

