# VOLCPLUME, an interactive open access web platform for the multiscale monitoring of volcanic emissions and their impacts on the atmosphere

**^^Marie Boichu^^ ^1^, Raphael Grandin^2^, Théo Mathurin^3^, Nicolas Pascal^3^, Christine Deroo^1^, Colette Brogniez^1^, Maximilien Patou^3^, Sylvain Neut^3^, Cédric Tétard^3^, Jérôme Riedi^1,3^, Luc Blarel^1^, Philippe Goloub^1^**

<!-- more -->> - **Affiliations:**  ^1^CNRS, LOA -- Laboratoire d'Optique Atmosphérique, UMR 8518, Univ. Lille, Lille, F-59000, France; ^2^Institut de Physique du Globe de Paris, Univ. Paris Cité, Paris, F-75005, France; ^3^AERIS/CARE Data and Services Center, CNRS, CNES UMS 2877, Univ. Lille, Lille, F-59000, France 

> - **Presentation type:** Talk

> - **Presentation time:** [Friday 15:45 - 16:00](../sessions_comparison.md#__tabbed_4_1), [Room S150](../maps_venue.md#__tabbed_1_2)

> - **Programme No:** 3.17.9

> - [Theme 3](../theme3.md) > [Session 17](../sessions/session-3-17.md)

--- 

:fontawesome-solid-book: **Abstract**

The open access VOLCPLUME web platform (https://volcplume.aeris-data.fr) is part of the Volcano Space Observatory portal under development within the framework of the Horizon Europe EOSC FAIR EASE project. This web interface aims at supporting the near-real-time monitoring of volcanic emissions and the multi-scale analysis of volcanic plumes in the atmosphere from local to global scales (Boichu and Mathurin 2022).
To reach this goal, VOLCPLUME allows users to jointly analyse a broad set of satellite and ground-based active/passive remote sensing observations of both volcanic gas and particles, including Low Earth and Geostationary Orbit imagery, spaceborne and ground-based lidar, as well as photometric measurements. The platform also gives access to in-situ ground-level data from air quality monitoring networks. This synergy aims at facilitating the assessment of the multiscale impacts of volcanic plumes on atmospheric chemistry, air quality, aviation safety and climate.
The « SO~2~ Flux Calculator » (https://dataviz.icare.univ-lille.fr/so2-flux-calculator), a companion web application, also allows for automating the computation of daily SO~2~ gas flux emissions from Sentinel-5P/TROPOMI observations with a robust noise estimation (Grandin et al. 2024). Regarding volcano monitoring and initialisation of atmospheric models, such interactive tools allow for remotely tracking changes in the degassing or eruptive activities of any isolated or non-instrumented volcano.
For illustration, we present different case-studies including the eruptions of La Palma/Cumbre Vieja, Piton de La Fournaise, Soufrière Saint-Vincent and Hunga Tonga.
Boichu, M. & Mathurin, T. (2022), DOI:10.25326/362; Grandin, R. et al. (2024), DOI:10.1029/2024JB029309
  -----------------------------------------------------------------------       -----------------------------------------------------------------------
  -----------------------------------------------------------------------

