# Assessing impact and dynamics of cone collapses triggered by explosive eruptions: the February 10 2022 eruption of Mt Etna (Italy)

**Laura Pioli^1^, Veronica Pili^1^, Samuele Pili^1^, Simona Scollo^2^, Francesco Amadio^1^, Emanuela De Beni^2^, Massimo Cantarero^2^**

<!-- more -->> - **Affiliations:** ^1^Università degli Studi di Cagliari, Dipartimento di Scienze Chimiche e Geologiche, Italy ^2^Istituto Nazionale di Geofisica e Vulcanologia, Sezione di Catania, Osservatorio Etneo, Italy

> - **Presentation type:** Poster

> - **Presentation time:** [Friday 16:30 - 18:00](../sessions_comparison.md#__tabbed_4_6), [Room Poster Hall](../maps_venue.md#__tabbed_1_1)

> - **Poster Board Number:** [239](../map_poster_boards.md#friday)

> - **Programme No:** 3.17.21

> - [Theme 3](../theme3.md) > [Session 17](../sessions/session-3-17.md)

--- 

:fontawesome-solid-book: **Abstract**

Cinder cones of persistently active volcanoes are unstable, rapidly growing edifices that change in shape and volume due to eruptive events, vent shifting and collapses. They are subjected to repeated building /destruction phases. Triggering mechanisms of cone collapses can be very variable as they can occur in between or during eruptions. Understanding their dynamics and onset mechanisms requires collecting a multidisciplinary dataset, based on both remote sensing and field studies.
We present a model for the onset and flow dynamics of multiple syn eruptive collapses occurred during lava fountain at Etna volcano (Italy) on February 10 2022. We collected data from visual and thermal monitoring, UAS and satellite based data and field surveys. While the effect of the eruption dynamics on cone instability and the volume of the collapsed mass could be assessed based on remote sensing data, the dynamics of transport and depositional mechanisms of the flows could be modeled based on stratigraphic and sedimentological studies of the deposit. Our results suggest that dyke intrusion and multiple vent opening were key processes in triggering collapses, and that the internal cone structure controlled the volume and dynamics of the flows. This also confirm that the impact of these events could be significant, especially in areas of mass tourism, and that they should be considered for hazard assessment in proximal areas of persistently active volcanoes.

