# Diffuse CO2 emission from NERZ, NSRZ and NWRZ Tenerife volcanic systems, Canary Islands

**David Afonso ^1,2^, Gladys V. Melián ^1,2^, Joel Siverio Rodríguez ^1^, Alberto Cano ^1^, María Asensio-Ramos ^1^, Pedro A. Hernández ^1,2^, Eleazar Padrón ^1,2^, Germán D. Padilla ^1,2^, Victoria J. Leal ^1,2^, Nemesio M. Pérez ^1,2 ^**

<!-- more -->> - **Affiliations:** ^1^ Instituto Volcanológico de Canarias (INVOLCAN), Puerto de la Cruz, Tenerife, Canary Islands, Spain.  ^2^ Instituto Tecnológico y de Energías Renovables (ITER), Granadilla de Abona, Tenerife, Canary Islands, Spain. 

> - **Presentation type:** Poster

> - **Presentation time:** [Friday 16:30 - 18:00](../sessions_comparison.md#__tabbed_4_6), [Room Poster Hall](../maps_venue.md#__tabbed_1_1)

> - **Poster Board Number:** [261](../map_poster_boards.md#friday)

> - **Programme No:** 3.17.33

> - [Theme 3](../theme3.md) > [Session 17](../sessions/session-3-17.md)

--- 

:fontawesome-solid-book: **Abstract**

Tenerife (2,034 km²), the largest of the Canary Archipelago, features three volcanic rift zones-oriented NW-SE, NE-SW, and N-S, with a central volcanic structure, Las Cañadas caldera housing Teide-Pico Viejo volcanic complex. Since 2000, yearly CO₂ degassing surveys have been conducted along the NW (72 km²), NS (325 km²), and NE (210 km²) Rift Zones (RZ) as part of the volcano geochemical monitoring program. Soil CO₂ efflux measurements have been always performed by means of the accumulation chamber method. To construct contour maps and estimate total CO₂ emissions, Sequential Gaussian simulation (sGs) interpolation has been used. Results of soil CO2 efflux measured during 2024 surveys showed values from non-detectable to 39.9g·m⁻²·d⁻¹, with mean values of 3.1, 2.2, and 1.3 g·m⁻²·d⁻¹ for NERZ, NWRZ, and NSRZ, respectively. Estimated diffuse CO₂ emissions were 508±15t·d⁻¹ (NWRZ), 279±11t·d⁻¹ (NSRZ), and 128±9t·d⁻¹ (NERZ), corresponding to normalized rates by studied area of 2.4, 0.9, and 1.8t·d⁻¹·km⁻², respectively. Temporal evolution of time series of the three RZ show a continuous increase from 2013 to 2021, prior to the volcano-tectonic seismic swarm of April 2015 and the increase in seismicity recorded from the end of 2016, with the occurrence during this period of several LP-type seismic swarms (Hernández et al., 2017), to subsequently show an opposite downward trend. Our data suggest that temporal variations in CO₂ emissions are linked to seismic activity, reflecting dynamic processes within Tenerife's hydrothermal-magmatic system.  
Hernández et al. (2017). Bull. Volcanol., 79:30, doi: 10.1007/s00445-017-1109-9.

