# SpectroGas: the development and testing of a low-cost spectroscopic Multi-GAS

**^^Rebecca England^^ , Tom Pering, Thomas Wilkes**

<!-- more -->> - **Affiliations:** School of Geography and Planning, University of Sheffield, Sheffield, UK

> - **Presentation type:** Poster

> - **Presentation time:** [Friday 16:30 - 18:00](../sessions_comparison.md#__tabbed_4_6), [Room Poster Hall](../maps_venue.md#__tabbed_1_1)

> - **Poster Board Number:** [251](../map_poster_boards.md#friday)

> - **Programme No:** 3.17.28

> - [Theme 3](../theme3.md) > [Session 17](../sessions/session-3-17.md)

--- 

:fontawesome-solid-book: **Abstract**

The Multi-GAS technique is the current standard for measuring the composition of volcanic gases. However, they are prohibitively expensive, immediately restricting the measurement and understanding of gas release to financially able organisations. These instruments use non-dispersive (NDIR) spectroscopy to measure CO~2~ concentrations and electrochemical sensors for other gases, such as SO~2~ and H~2~S. Whilst NDIR spectroscopy for CO~2~ allows for precise measurements with a high temporal resolution, they typically come with a relatively high cost (£1k - £6k). In comparison, electrochemical sensors are more affordable (~£100), but due to their exposure to harsh volcanic conditions, they require frequent replacement and regular calibration. Comparisons between electrochemical and NDIR measurements are additionally challenging, due to differing response times. Therefore, new low-cost techniques which can allow for high accuracy measurements possible of capturing multiple sources need to be developed. Here, we present the development and initial testing of a new low-cost Multi-GAS instrument, called the SpectroGas, based solely on spectroscopic approaches. The SpectroGas employs broadband cavity-enhanced absorption spectroscopy (BBCEAS) which utilises optical cavities to enhance the interaction pathlength of light with the sample, the first such attempt in volcanology, for the measurement of SO~2~ and H~2~S. The overall instrument is lower in cost and allows for high-accuracy spatially distributed measurements at volcanoes.

