# Retrievals of volcanic cloud properties with hyperspectral infrared satellite instruments

**^^Isabelle A. Taylor^^ ^1^, Roy G. Grainger^1^, Antonín Knížek^2^**

<!-- more -->> - **Affiliations:** ^1^COMET, Atmospheric, Oceanic and Planetary Physics, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK; ^2^Atmospheric, Oceanic and Planetary Physics, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK

> - **Presentation type:** Poster

> - **Presentation time:** [Friday 16:30 - 18:00](../sessions_comparison.md#__tabbed_4_6), [Room Poster Hall](../maps_venue.md#__tabbed_1_1)

> - **Poster Board Number:** [279](../map_poster_boards.md#friday)

> - **Programme No:** 3.17.42

> - [Theme 3](../theme3.md) > [Session 17](../sessions/session-3-17.md)

--- 

:fontawesome-solid-book: **Abstract**

Satellite data offers numerous advantages for monitoring volcanic clouds. Two of the instruments which can be used are the Infrared Atmospheric Sounding Interferometer (IASI) and the Cross-track Infrared Sounder (CrIS). They both measure in the infrared with a high spectral resolution, make measurements twice a day and have a long data record.
The Earth Observation Data Group (EODG) at the University of Oxford has a number of tools for studying volcanic clouds with infrared sounders. The first rapidly detects elevated levels of SO~2~ and ash. The Near Real Time SO~2~ product and the outputs for 2007-2021 are displayed on a portal managed by the Centre for Observation and Modelling of Earthquakes, Volcanoes and Tectonics (COMET) with plans to add the CrIS and ash products.
A second 'iterative' retrieval, is used to quantify information about volcanic clouds. The SO~2~ retrievals have been applied to IASI spectra for the period 2007 to 2021, creating a comprehensive dataset. This dataset incorporates measurements from large explosive eruptions (e.g. Nabro and Hunga in 2011 and 2022 respectively), smaller events and ongoing degassing. It also detects a number of anthropogenic sources.
We recently began a new project where we will redevelop our volcanic cloud retrievals. The new Oxford Hyperspectral Atmospheric Retrieval Package (Ox-HARP) will retrieve information about SO~2~, ash, H~2~SO~4~ and water vapour in volcanic clouds using data from IASI and CrIS. It is also being developed with the next generation of satellite instruments, including the InfraRed Sounder (IRS) and IASI-NG, in mind.

