# Quantification of low-temperature gas emissions reveals CO2 flux underestimates at Soufrière Hills volcano, Montserrat

**^^Alexander Riddell^^ ^1^, Mike Burton^1^, Benjamin Esse^1^, Brendan McCormick Kilbride^1^, Antonio Chiarugi^2^, Thomas Christopher^3,4^, Francesco D'Amato^5^, Graham A. Ryan^3,4^, Adam Stinton^3,4^ and Silvia Viciani^5^**

<!-- more -->> - **Affiliations:**  ^1^University of Manchester, School of Earth and Environmental Science, Manchester, UK. ^2^ SENSIT Technologies EMEA Srl, Bolzano, Italy. ^3^Montserrat Volcano Observatory, Montserrat, West Indies. ^4^Seismic Research Centre, The University of the West Indies, St. Augustine, Trinidad & Tobago. ^5^CNR -- National Institute of Optics, Firenze, Italy. 

> - **Presentation type:** Poster

> - **Presentation time:** [Friday 16:30 - 18:00](../sessions_comparison.md#__tabbed_4_6), [Room Poster Hall](../maps_venue.md#__tabbed_1_1)

> - **Poster Board Number:** [245](../map_poster_boards.md#friday)

> - **Programme No:** 3.17.24

> - [Theme 3](../theme3.md) > [Session 17](../sessions/session-3-17.md)

--- 

:fontawesome-solid-book: **Abstract**

Volcanic degassing transports volatiles from Earth's interior to the atmosphere, playing a critical role in global geochemical cycles and influencing climate on local, regional, and global scales. Volatile species not only drive volcanic eruptions but also control magma ascent processes and the style of eruptive activity. Consequently, monitoring and quantifying magmatic gas emissions and compositions are central to volcanological research.
Currently, MultiGAS instruments are widely used for in-situ measurements of key volcanic gases, typically sulfur species and CO~2~. However, MultiGAS instruments, which combine electrochemical and optical sensors, face challenges such as differing frequency responses and sensitivity to pressure and temperature variations. This highlights the need for improved gas-sensing technology.
To address these limitations, we developed a novel optical MultiGAS (OMG) analyser capable of high-frequency, simultaneous measurements of volcanic gas species. The OMG comprises multiple optical instruments, each with an open-path multipass cell that quantifies gas concentrations at 1-4 Hz.
We performed helicopter-borne OMG measurements at Soufrière Hills Volcano, Montserrat, revealing distinct spikes in SO~2~ and HCl concentrations within a larger CO~2~-rich plume. Acid-rich concentration spikes matched the distribution of high-temperature fumaroles, whereas CO~2~ is emitted broadly from high- and low-temperature fumaroles. We demonstrate that quantification of the cold CO~2~ emissions would not be possible using a standard MultiGAS instrument and that the widely used CO~2~/SO~2~ x SO~2~ flux quantification of CO~2~ flux would lead to over a threefold reduction in CO~2~ flux. This suggests that traditional measurements may significantly underestimate cold CO~2~ degassing, leading to underestimated global volcanic fluxes.

