# Escalating sulphur in the Campi Flegrei fumaroles marks a step change in caldera unrest.

**Stefano Caliro^1^, Giovanni Chiodini^2^, Rosario Avino^1^, Antonio Carandente^1^, Emilio Cuoco^1^, Mauro Antonio Di Vito^1^, Carmine Minopoli^1^, Francesco Rufino^1^, Alessandro Santi^1^, Joao Lages^3^, Annarita Mangiacapra^1^, Brian Monteleone^4^, Lucia Pappalardo^1^, Zoltan Taracsák^5^, Cecilia Tramati^3,6^, Salvatrice Vizzini^3,6^, and ^^Alessandro Aiuppa^^ ^3^**

<!-- more -->> - **Affiliations:** ^1^Istituto Nazionale di Geofisica e Vulcanologia, Osservatorio Vesuviano, Napoli, Italy; ^2^Istituto Nazionale di Geofisica e Vulcanologia, Sezione di Bologna, Italy; ^3^Dipartimento di Scienze della Terra e del Mare, Università di Palermo, Italy; ^4^Department of Geology and Geophysics, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institute, United States of America; ^5^Department of Earth Sciences, University of Cambridge, United Kingdom; ^6^Consorzio Nazionale Interuniversitario per le Scienze del Mare, CoNISMa, Italy

> - **Presentation type:** Talk

> - **Presentation time:** [Friday 14:30 - 14:45](../sessions_comparison.md#__tabbed_4_1), [Room S150](../maps_venue.md#__tabbed_1_2)

> - **Programme No:** 3.17.6

> - [Theme 3](../theme3.md) > [Session 17](../sessions/session-3-17.md)

--- 

:fontawesome-solid-book: **Abstract**

The long-lived, inter-eruptive repose periods of active calderas worldwide are occasionally interrupted by phases of unrest, characterised by escalating seismicity, ground uplift, and intensifying gas emissions. The Campi Flegrei caldera, in the suburban metropolitan area of Napoli (Italy), has been restless since the 1950s, and yet the magmatic vs. hydrothermal nature of the unrest remains matter of debate. Here, we document a remarkable (factor >4) increase in H~2~S concentrations in the Solfatara fumaroles of Campi Flegrei since mid-2018. Isotopic results indicate an isotopically light (δ^34^S<0 vs. Vienna Canyon Diablo Troilite, VCDT) signature for this fumarolic H~2~S, consistent with the magmatic sulphur signature in the area (δ^34^S of ~ -1.7±1.1 ‰; as inferred from the isotope composition of sulphur in silicate melt inclusions in olivines). Using results of hydrothermal gas calculations and numerical models of magmatic degassing, we propose the escalating fumarolic H~2~S at Campi Flegrei to be sourced by mafic magma undergoing decompressional (ascent-driven) degassing in the 6-9 km depth range. We however cannot exclude some extent of sulphur remobilization from hydrothermal minerals due to magmatic gas-driven heating of the hydrothermal system and opening of new fractures during intense seismicity. Our results corroborate the magmatic origin of the ongoing Campi Flegrei unrest. Comparison with results elsewhere indicates escalating sulphur to be recurrent at reawakening hydrothermal volcanoes/calderas. At Campi Flegrei, any further compositional evolution of the fumaroles toward the magmatic gas range (increasing H~2~S, and appearance of  SO~2~ and HCl) should be carefully considered as a sign of increased eruption likelihood

