# Magma ascent dynamics and its control on compositional diversity of volcanism across tectonic settings

**Kai Zhao^1^, Olivier Bachmann^2^**

<!-- more -->> - **Affiliations:** ^1^CAS Key Laboratory of Planetary Sciences, Purple Mountain Observatory, Chinese Academy of Sciences; Nanjing, 210023, China. ^2^Department of Earth Sciences, ETH Zurich, Clausiusstrasse 25, CH-8092 Zurich, Switzerland.

> - **Presentation type:** Talk

> - **Presentation time:** [Tuesday 11:00 - 11:15](../sessions_comparison.md#__tabbed_2_1), [Room S150](../maps_venue.md#__tabbed_1_2)

> - **Programme No:** 3.2.3

> - [Theme 3](../theme3.md) > [Session 2](../sessions/session-3-2.md)

--- 

:fontawesome-solid-book: **Abstract**

The compositional variability of volcanic rocks in continental settings is generally thought to be related to source melting and/or reservoir processes. However, the modulation effect of ascent dynamics on the composition of erupted magmas remains poorly assessed. Viscosity calculations of data collection for ~90 global volcanoes and numerical modeling suggest that magma eruptibility is influenced by initial magma viscosity at the base of a volcanic conduit rooted in the subvolcanic reservoir, and that ~10^6.0±0.3^ Pa s represents a threshold of eruption below which magmas ascend at rates higher than the critical ascent rates of freezing. Rhyolitic melt viscosity in continental rifts/hotspots is one order of magnitude higher than that in continental arcs (~10^5.5±0.2^ versus ~10^4.5±0.2^ Pa s on average, respectively) due to ~1.5 wt% lower pre-eruptive melt H~2~O contents in rifts/hotspots at comparable temperatures. The continental rift/hotspot rhyolitic melts thus cannot accommodate large fractions of phenocrysts for eruption, leading to an abundance of crystal-poor (<~30%) rhyolites and a paucity of volcanic rocks with intermediate bulk-rock composition. In contrast, arc rhyolitic melts with lower viscosity can accommodate higher fractions (up to ~50%) of phenocrysts while still remaining below the viscosity threshold, leading to the common appearance of crystal-rich andesites and dacites (with rhyolitic interstitial melts). Therefore, the rheological threshold acts as a filter on the generation of contrasting volcanic rocks in different tectonic settings, which ultimately arises from the different magmatic H~2~O contents.

