# Volatile contents and quenching conditions during the 2021-2022 eruption of Hunga volcano, Tonga

**Mila Huebsch^1^, Mathieu Colombier^2^, Joali Paredes-Mariño^1^, Shane J. Cronin^1^, Jie Wu^3^, Ingrid Ukstins^1^, David Adams^1^, Geoff Kilgour^4^, Alex RL Nichols^5^, Annahlise Hall^1^, Annaleise Klein^6^, Benedicta Arhatari^6^, Andrew Stevenson^6^, Sung-Hyun Park^7^ and Taaniela Kula^8^**

<!-- more -->> - **Affiliations:** ^1^University of Auckland, School of Environment, Auckland, New Zealand; ^2^Ludwig Maximilians University of Munich, Department of Earth and Environmental Sciences, Munich, Germany; ^3^University of Otago, Department of Geology, Dunedin, New Zealand; ^4^Te Pū Ao \| GNSScience, Wairakei Research Centre, Taupo, New Zealand; ^5^University of Canterbury, Christchurch, New Zealand; ^6^Australian Nuclear Science and Technology Organization, Clayton, VIC, Australia; ^7^Korea PolarResarch Institute, Incheon, Korea, Republic of (South); ^8^Government of Tonga,Tonga Geological Services, Nuku\`alofa, Tonga

> - **Presentation type:** Talk

> - **Presentation time:** [Tuesday 16:15 - 16:30](../sessions_comparison.md#__tabbed_2_1), [Room S150](../maps_venue.md#__tabbed_1_2)

> - **Programme No:** 3.2.11

> - [Theme 3](../theme3.md) > [Session 2](../sessions/session-3-2.md)

--- 

:fontawesome-solid-book: **Abstract**

The 2021-2022 eruption of Hunga volcano (Tonga) began with weak Surtseyan phases and culminated in a climactic submarine Plinian explosive event and caldera collapse on 15 January 2022. Here we present new insights into the conditions and depths of magma quenching, as preserved by samples spanning stratigraphic units: i) lapilli and bombs from pre-climactic float pumice rafts (stages 1 and 2; Tongatapu); ii) the first lapilli fall from the climactic event (stage 3; Tongatapu); and iii) dense bombs from subsequent waning activity (stage 10; inner caldera rim). Geochemical compositions were determined using Electron Probe Micro-analysis. Fourier Transform Infrared Spectroscopy (FTIR) was performed for quantification of dissolved volatile concentrations, as well as Micro-Computed Tomography for 3D textural analysis, at the ANSTO Australian synchrotron. Lapilli form three main classes: i) dense glass, ii) dark pumice and iii) light pumice, with breadcrust rinds common. Glass-FTIR results span 0.1-1.8 wt% H2Ot. Secondary hydration of H2Om is negligible for subaerially deposited stage 1-3 and minor for stage 10. Plagioclase rim thermometry (Putirka 2008) indicates final crystallization temperatures of 1100-1150 C. Saturation pressures (MagmaSat; Ghiorso and Gualda, 2015) range from ~0.1-5 MPa for the pre-climactic stages, ~2-12 MPa for the climactic onset, and ~7-15 MPa for the waning stage. Corresponding depths show quenching in confined conditions within the edifice and particle textures suggest that this occurred in contact with external water. Ongoing work includes modelling of 3-phase magma viscosity, as important context for the multidisciplinary study of this enigmatic eruption and potentially common, hazardous eruption style.

