# Early evolution of the Palaeogene Mull volcano: An integrated volcanological and geochemical approach

**^^Goddard F.J.^1^^^ , Kerr A.C.^1^, Gooday R.J.^2^ McDonald, I.^1^, Brown, D.J.^3^**

<!-- more -->> - **Affiliations:**  ^1^School of Earth and Environmental Sciences, Cardiff University, Main Building, Park Place, Cardiff, CF10 3AT UK. Correspondence email: gardnerfj@cardiff.ac.uk ^2^Natural Sciences Department, National Museums Scotland, Chambers Street, Edinburgh, EH1 1JF, UK. ^3^School of Geographical and Earth Sciences, University of Glasgow, Molema Building, Glasgow, G12 8QQ UK. 

> - **Presentation type:** Poster

> - **Presentation time:** [Tuesday 16:30 - 18:30](../sessions_comparison.md#__tabbed_2_6), [Room Poster Hall](../maps_venue.md#__tabbed_1_1)

> - **Poster Board Number:** [205](../map_poster_boards.md#tuesday)

> - **Programme No:** 3.2.28

> - [Theme 3](../theme3.md) > [Session 2](../sessions/session-3-2.md)

--- 

:fontawesome-solid-book: **Abstract**

The British Palaeogene Igneous Province (BPIP) has long been an area of interest, both for British volcanology and in the context of the early opening of the North Atlantic. Previous work has focused on the Mull lavas (e.g. [4]) and other BPIP igneous centres, such as Arran [2],[3]. However, since the Mull Memoir was published by Bailey et. al. [1], little research has been conducted on the early evolution of the Mull central complex, the focus of this study.
During fieldwork, stratigraphic relationships between intrusive and extrusive deposits have been examined in detail, and new models have been developed for the caldera infill sequence. These models detail a change from basaltic to silicic activity and evidence at least two stages of caldera collapse. Major and trace element analysis elucidate processes such as magma mixing and crustal contamination and determine links between sub-surface magma conduits and erupted deposits. Geochemical fingerprinting is used to investigate the nature of the basement rocks, through which magmas have evolved.
An updated volcanological and petrological model is presented of the early evolution of the Mull central complex. The results of this study expand our understanding of the BPIP and have implications for our understanding of explosive volcanism, particularly in young and evolving environments.
[1] Bailey, E.B. et.al. (1924) "Tertiary and Post-tertiary Geology of Mull, Loch Aline and Oban", British Geological Survey
[2] Gooday, R.J. et.al. (2018) Bulletin of Volcanology 80:70
[3] Gooday, R.J. (2024) Lithos 488-489, 107789
[4] Kerr, A.C. (1999) Journal of Petrology 40:6. pp.873-908

