# The Chronology of the 15 January 2022 Hunga Eruption revealed through eye-witness descriptions, tephra and tsunami deposition

**Joali Paredes-Mariño^1^, Shane J. Cronin^1^, Folauhola Latu'ila^2^, Pupunu Tukuafu^2^, Nikolasi Heni^2^, Jie Wu^3^, Kyle Hamilton^4^, Ingrid Ukstins^1^, Mila Huebsch^1^, Taaniela Kula^2^**

<!-- more -->> - **Affiliations:** ^1^School of Environment, The University of Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand ^2^Tonga Geological Services, Government of the Kingdom of Tonga, Tongatapu, Tonga ^3^Department of Geology, University of Otago, Dunedin, New Zealand ^4^School of Earth & Atmospheric Sciences, Faculty of Science, Queensland University of Technology, Brisbane, Australia 

> - **Presentation type:** Poster

> - **Presentation time:** [Monday 16:30 - 18:30](../sessions_comparison.md#__tabbed_1_6), [Room Poster Hall](../maps_venue.md#__tabbed_1_1)

> - **Poster Board Number:** [191](../map_poster_boards.md#monday)

> - **Programme No:** 3.3.22

> - [Theme 3](../theme3.md) > [Session 3](../sessions/session-3-3.md)

--- 

:fontawesome-solid-book: **Abstract**

We present an overview of the chronology of the explosive 15 January 2022 Hunga eruption. This 11-hour event is described in ten distinct stages. *Pre-climax* pumice rafts, arriving to the shore of Tongatapu in early January, are associated with Surtseyan eruptions from 29/12/21--04/01/22 (*stage-1*). Pumice rafts arriving post-eruption are produced during the onset of the climatic phase of January 15^th^, occurring shortly before 04:00 UTC (*stage-2*). Afterwards, two waves were witnessed at Tongatapu. Firstly a ~15--20 min period of lapilli fall (~04:40--05:00 UTC, *stage-3*) was recorded in phone videos on Tongatapu and Eua (65--115 km from the volcano). The 0.5--5 cm diameter, low-density particles formed a clean, sparse layer (approx. 1--2 particles/10 cm^2^). Next, coarse-medium ash fell (*stage-4*), as the island went into darkness. On the western Tongatapu coast, *stage-4* fall is covered by a tsunami deposit (05:05~15) and *stage-5* fall lies below the largest tsunami deposit of ~05:45 UTC. *Stages-6, 7, and 8* are represented by layers (~1 cm each) of medium-sized ash particles above the largest tsunami. A final thin layer of ash fall (*stage-9*) is above a tsunami deposit of ~08:45*--*09:00 UTC. The waning activity (*stage-10*) is represented by surtseyan fresh bombs. Tephra deposits are pumice-dominated initially, and become generally finer, denser and less sorted over time. The dispersion axis of the fall was weakly directed towards the ESE. Particle physical characteristics suggest that apart from the initial minutes, the primary fragmentation mechanism was magma-water interaction.

