# CatVolc: A Comprehensive Database of Geochemical and Geochronological Data from the Catalan Volcanic Zone, Spain

**^^Adelina Geyer^^ ^1^, Martín Miranda-Muruzábal^2,3^, Meritxell Aulinas^2,4,5^, Helena Albert^2,4^, Miquel Vilà^6^, Fus Micheo^6^, Xavier Bolós^1^, Dario Pedrazzi^1^,Guillem Gisbert^2^, and Llorenç Planagumà^7^**

<!-- more -->> - **Affiliations:** ^1^GEO3BCN, CSIC, Lluís Solé i Sabarís s/n, 08028 Barcelona (ageyer@geo3bcn.csic.es); ^2^Departament de Mineralogia, Petrologia i Geologia Aplicada, Universitat de Barcelona, Marti Franquès s/n, 08028 Barcelona; ^3^Department of Earth Sciences, University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland; ^4^Geomodels Research Institute, Universitat de Barcelona, Martí Franquès s/n, 08028 Barcelona; ^5^Volcanic Petrology and Geochemistry, UB, Unidad Asociada al CSIC por el GEO3BCN; ^6^Institut Cartogràfic i Geològic de Catalunya (ICGC), Parc de Montjuïc s/n, 08038 Barcelona, Spain; ^7^Centre per a la Sostenibilitat Territorial, 17178, La Vall d'en Bas, Spain

> - **Presentation type:** Poster

> - **Presentation time:** [Friday 16:30 - 18:00](../sessions_comparison.md#__tabbed_4_6), [Room Poster Hall](../maps_venue.md#__tabbed_1_1)

> - **Poster Board Number:** [155](../map_poster_boards.md#friday)

> - **Programme No:** 3.4.32

> - [Theme 3](../theme3.md) > [Session 4](../sessions/session-3-4.md)

--- 

:fontawesome-solid-book: **Abstract**

The Catalan Volcanic Zone (CVZ) in northeastern Spain is an intraplate alkaline volcanic region linked to the Western Mediterranean's opening and the European Rift System's development. Volcanic activity began in L'Empordà (>12--8 Ma), progressed to La Selva (7.9--1.7 Ma), and culminated in the Garrotxa Volcanic Field (<0.7--0.01 Ma). Despite decades of research, key aspects remain unclear, including magma plumbing systems' evolution, ascent mechanisms, and a detailed chronology of volcanism. Addressing these gaps requires consolidated geochemical, petrological, and geochronological data, which have remained scattered and unintegrated.
This study introduces the CatVolc (Catalan Volcanism) database, unifying geochemical and geochronological data for volcanic materials in the CVZ. It includes analyses of 405 rock samples (296 juvenile magmatic rocks, 109 xenoliths) and radiometric/thermoluminescence ages from 57 rocks, 4 paleosols, and 1 sediment sample. Each entry provides information on sampling sites, lithology, whole-rock compositions, isotopic ratios, mineral chemistry, and/or radiometric/thermoluminescence dating.
Preliminary analyses of CatVolc reveal critical knowledge gaps and suggest future research directions. This database is essential for understanding magmatic systems and volcanic activity within the CVZ, particularly the Garrotxa Volcanic Field, aiding hazard assessment and improving insights into future eruptions.
This work has been developed under the financial support of the Institut Cartogràfic i Geològic de Catalunya, the Parc Natural de la Zona Volcànica de La Garrotxa, the Fundación General CSIC's ComFuturo programme and the Marie Skłodowska-Curie grant agreement No. 101034263, and the grants 2021 COLAB 00367 (MEFP),  and PID2022-139047NA-I00 funded by MCIN/AEI/ 10.13039/501100011033 and by "ERDF A way of making Europe.

