# Spatio-temporal distribution and evolution of the distributed volcanism, central Mexico: examples: Valle de Bravo, Chichinautzin and Michoacán-Guanajuato volcanic fields.

**^^Carmen Jaimes-Viera^1^^^ , Amiel Nieto-Torres^2^**

<!-- more -->> - **Affiliations:**  ^1^Facultad de Ciencias, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, México; ^2^Millennium Institute on Volcanic Risk Research -- Ckelar Volcanoes, Antofagasta, Chile. 

> - **Presentation type:** Poster

> - **Presentation time:** [Friday 16:30 - 18:00](../sessions_comparison.md#__tabbed_4_6), [Room Poster Hall](../maps_venue.md#__tabbed_1_1)

> - **Poster Board Number:** [133](../map_poster_boards.md#friday)

> - **Programme No:** 3.4.18

> - [Theme 3](../theme3.md) > [Session 4](../sessions/session-3-4.md)

--- 

:fontawesome-solid-book: **Abstract**

From the analysis of volcanoes in the volcanic fields of Valle de Bravo (VBVF), Sierra Chichinautzin (SCVF) and Michoacán-Guanajuato (MGVF) in central Mexico, we identify spatial and temporal distribution patterns of past eruptions. These three volcanic fields are located in the central part of the Trans Mexican Volcanic Belt (TMVB), result of the subduction of the Cocos and Rivera plates beneath the North American plate since the Miocene. All these volcanic fields are limited by polygenetic volcanoes such as Popocatépetl to the East, Nevado de Toluca in the middle and Colima volcano to the West. In the VBVF we can find scoria cones, domes, dome complexes and one small shield volcano. The SCVF includes scoria cones with lava flows, shield volcanoes crowned with a scoria cone and coneless lava flows. The MGVF includes lava domes, scoria and cinder cones, small-to-medium-shield volcanoes, maar volcanoes, fissure-fed lava flows, and a few stratovolcanoes. The total number of vents in VBVF is 143 in an area of 3,700 km^2^ vents/km^2^, with an average density of 0.0386. SCVF is 227 in an area of 3,500 km^2^, with an average density of 0.064 vents/km^2^. In the MGVF there are 1,148 volcanoes in an area of 26,200 km^2^, which represents an average density of 0.043 vents/km^2^. Main orientation of vents in VBVF is 30°-40° (NE), in SCVF is mainly east-west, from 70° to 115° and in the MGVF are 20°-100° (N-E) and 90°-120° (N-SE). In these areas it is necessary to carry out a volcanic risk assessment.

