# New 1-to-100k scale geology map embracing volcano geology in the Harrat Lunayyir, NW Saudi Arabia

**^^Mahmoud Ashor^^ ^1^, Károly Németh^1,2^, Khalid H. Abdulhafez^1^, Abdulrahman Sowaigh^1^**

<!-- more -->> - **Affiliations:** ^1^Geohazard Center, Saudi Geological Survey, Jeddah, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia; ^2^FluidByDepth Lendület Research Group, Institute of Earth Physics and Space Science, Sopron, Hungary

> - **Presentation type:** Talk

> - **Presentation time:** [Friday 09:30 - 09:45](../sessions_comparison.md#__tabbed_4_3), [Room R280](../maps_venue.md#__tabbed_1_1)

> - **Programme No:** 3.4.5

> - [Theme 3](../theme3.md) > [Session 4](../sessions/session-3-4.md)

--- 

:fontawesome-solid-book: **Abstract**

Along the western margin of the Arabian Peninsula, at least 19 monogenetic volcanic fields have been identified. The Saudi Geological Survey (SGS) is currently developing a comprehensive volcanic hazard interface for both scientific research and other end-user purposes. This initiative involves systematically compiling all available multi-sourced geophysical data and conducting real-time complex geophysical monitoring (including seismic activity, gas measurements, water temperature, and chemistry). This effort depends significantly on the establishment of an intricate volcanic geology interface. The integration of nearly four decades of accumulated but dispersed information is expected to create a valuable resource. Saudi Arabia offers a 1-to-250k geology map series through the National Geological Database; however, the geological data on the volcanic architecture of its numerous volcanic fields is quite general and does not align with current understandings of monogenetic volcanism. For the northern part of Harrat Rahat, near Al Madinah, geological maps have been produced by the USGS-SGS at scales of 1-to-75k and partially at 1-to-50k. Since the 2009 eruption unrest in Harrat Lunayyir, located northwest of Al Madinah near the Red Sea coast, geological mapping has accelerated to a 1-to-100k scale with a goal to provide a volcanic stratigraphy map based on direct observations. The heightened interest in regional tourism development, combined with the area's recent volcanic activities, has prompted efforts to complete detailed geological maps with a strong focus on volcanic geology. This aligns well with SGS's objectives to finalize geological mappings of its young volcanic fields.

