# Eruptive History of the Garibaldi -- Price Volcanic Field, British Columbia: Canada's Highest Threat Volcano

**^^Yannick Le Moigne^^ ^1^, Melanie Kelman^1^, Alexander Wilson^2^, James Kelly Russell^3^, Thomas J. Jones^4^, Kelly McCartney^4^, Glyn Williams-Jones^5^**

<!-- more -->> - **Affiliations:** ^1^Natural Resources Canada, Geological Survey of Canada, Vancouver, Canada; ^2^Seequent, Vancouver, Canada; ^3^Department of Earth, Ocean and Atmospheric Science, The University of British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada; ^4^Lancaster Environment Centre, Lancaster University, Lancaster, United Kingdom; ^5^Centre for Natural Hazards Research, Department of Earth Sciences, Simon Fraser University, Burnaby, Canada 

> - **Presentation type:** Poster

> - **Presentation time:** [Friday 16:30 - 18:00](../sessions_comparison.md#__tabbed_4_6), [Room Poster Hall](../maps_venue.md#__tabbed_1_1)

> - **Poster Board Number:** [162](../map_poster_boards.md#friday)

> - **Programme No:** 3.4.37

> - [Theme 3](../theme3.md) > [Session 4](../sessions/session-3-4.md)

--- 

:fontawesome-solid-book: **Abstract**

The Garibaldi Volcanic Belt, spanning northern Washington and British Columbia (BC), represents the northern extent of the Cascades Volcanic Arc. This belt includes Nch'[k]{.underline}ay̓ / Mount Garibaldi, the most threatening volcano in Canada, a prominent feature of a multi-vent Quaternary volcanic field located 60 km north of Vancouver, BC, and active since 1.3 Ma.
Building on foundational research from the 1950s and 1980s, new geological mapping, petrological data, and radiometric dating are used to interpret its eruptive history, refine its geochronology, and assess future volcanic hazards. This volcanic field has been significantly dissected by glaciation, deglaciation, and other erosive processes, leaving many areas inaccessible. Nevertheless, the stratigraphy and eruption sequence were successfully reconstructed with the aid of helicopter photogrammetry.
This volcanic field is predominantly calc-alkaline andesitic and dacitic resulting from intermittent volcanism: from 1.3 to 1.0 Ma, andesitic eruptions formed the basal formations of The Black Tusk, Mount Price, and Brohm Ridge centres. Between 0.7 and 0.4 Ma, activity shifted southward, dominated by dacitic eruptions, extending the Brohm Ridge and Round Mountain complexes. From 0.4 to 0.02 Ma, volcanic activity became more widespread, characterized by intermediate to felsic eruptions constructing the major volcanic edifices. Post-glacial eruptions (14--10 ka) at Opal Cone, Clinker Peak, and Dalton Dome produced voluminous intermediate to felsic lava flows.
Our refined mapping and geochronology results are used to assess future volcanic hazards. Using a scenario-based approach, we aim to provide information to support organizations and communities in evidence-based decision-making about the volcanic risks.

