# Eruption chronologies using a new volcanic region system based on tectonic environments

**^^Edward Venzke^^ , Ben Andrews, Kadie Bennis**

<!-- more -->> - **Affiliations:** Global Volcanism Program, Smithsonian Institution, Washington DC, USA

> - **Presentation type:** Poster

> - **Presentation time:** [Friday 16:30 - 18:00](../sessions_comparison.md#__tabbed_4_6), [Room Poster Hall](../maps_venue.md#__tabbed_1_1)

> - **Poster Board Number:** [164](../map_poster_boards.md#friday)

> - **Programme No:** 3.4.38

> - [Theme 3](../theme3.md) > [Session 4](../sessions/session-3-4.md)

--- 

:fontawesome-solid-book: **Abstract**

The IAVCEI Catalog of Active Volcanoes of the World (CAVW) series, published in 22 volumes (1951-1975), was a major founding reference for the "Volcanoes of the World" database, maintained by the Global Volcanism Program (GVP). This series was used to create a volcano organization system of Regions (each volume) and Subregions (chapters), which were modified over time but remained geographical. GVP has developed a new system of volcanic regions accounting for plate tectonics, deployed to the website during 2024, consisting of 139 Regions (Holocene volcanoes in 118, Pleistocene volcanoes in 117). Region names generally include or reference common scientific or geographic names, combined with five category terms indicative of the broad tectonic environment: Volcanic Arc (subduction), Volcanic Rift Province (rifting), Hotspot Volcano Group (mantle plume), Volcano Group (fault/fracture zones), and Volcanic Province (intraplate, back-arc, mixed, or uncertain). These Regions are further organized into 19 Region Groups, which take into consideration both geography and tectonics when possible (e.g. keeping volcanic arcs associated with a single plate together).
Having each volcano assigned to a region in the database allows for various queries and applications. Each Region Group webpage has regions shown separately with Holocene and Pleistocene volcano lists, and a chronology of all eruptions included in the VOTW sorted by date. This data is also available in a downloadable spreadsheet, which will allow more detailed analysis of eruption frequency and style within each region along with comparisons between regions.

