# GeoTeRi Database: A tool for exploring the geochemical evolution of post-caldera volcanism in Tenerife's central Teide-Pico Viejo Complex and Rift Systems.

**^^Olaya Dorado^^ ^1^, Adelina Geyer^1^, Joan Martí^2^**

<!-- more -->> - **Affiliations:**  ^1^Geociencias Barcelona (GEO3BCN), CSIC, Lluís Solé i Sabarís s/n, 08028 Barcelona; ^2^Department of Geosciences, Institute of Environmental Assessment and Water Research (IDAEA-CSIC), Jordi Girona 18-26, 08034, Barcelona, Spain 

> - **Presentation type:** Poster

> - **Presentation time:** [Friday 16:30 - 18:00](../sessions_comparison.md#__tabbed_4_6), [Room Poster Hall](../maps_venue.md#__tabbed_1_1)

> - **Poster Board Number:** [152](../map_poster_boards.md#friday)

> - **Programme No:** 3.4.30

> - [Theme 3](../theme3.md) > [Session 4](../sessions/session-3-4.md)

--- 

:fontawesome-solid-book: **Abstract**

The active volcanic activity in the populated island of Tenerife (Canary Islands) primarily occurs in the central Teide-Pico Viejo (T-PV) complex and along the Santiago del Teide and Dorsal rift zones. Understanding the volcanic stratigraphy, petrology, and geochemistry of the central T-PV complex and its correlation with the rift systems is critical for improving hazard assessment on island.
This study reviews the geochemistry of eruptive products from the last 180 ka, following the El Abrigo eruption, Tenerife's latest caldera-forming event. For this, we have constructed the GeoTeRi database, an extensive compilation of whole-rock major and trace elements analyses and isotopic data from over 43 published references. The current version of the database includes data from 561 rock samples, comprising over 500 whole-rock compositions and 172 isotopic analyses. Additionally, a review of the chronostratigraphy of the eruptions included in the database was conducted, drawing on published volcanostratigraphic maps and/or existing radiometric data, with the objective of giving a temporal context to the samples.
A detailed statistical analysis of the database has been conducted to assess its robustness, evaluate the representativeness of the included samples, and identify key knowledge gaps in understanding the central T-PV complex. GeoTeRi aims to reconstruct the geochemical evolution of Tenerife's active volcanic system and serves as a foundation for future research.
This research was partially funded by E.G., grant EVE (DG ECHO H2020 Ref. 826292) and the Intramural CSIC grant MAPCAN (Ref. 202130E083). OD was supported by an FPU grant (FPU18/02572).

