# Evaluation of lahar modelling techniques for informing risk reduction practices in emergency management and critical infrastructure operation. A case study of Taranaki Mounga, Aotearoa, New Zealand.

**^^Zoë Bowbrick,^^  Thomas M. Wilson, Heather M. Craig**

<!-- more -->> - **Affiliations:** School of Earth and Environment, University of Canterbury, Te Whare Wānanga o Waitaha, Ōtautahi Christchurch, Aotearoa New Zealand

> - **Presentation type:** Poster

> - **Presentation time:** [Tuesday 16:30 - 18:30](../sessions_comparison.md#__tabbed_2_6), [Room Poster Hall](../maps_venue.md#__tabbed_1_1)

> - **Poster Board Number:** [159](../map_poster_boards.md#tuesday)

> - **Programme No:** 3.5.18

> - [Theme 3](../theme3.md) > [Session 5](../sessions/session-3-5.md)

--- 

:fontawesome-solid-book: **Abstract**

Lahars are a highly destructive product of volcanic eruptions, impacting the environment and society as rapid flows of water, mud, and volcanic debris.  The impact of such flows on critical infrastructure can be significant and cause substantive community impacts.  Lahar hazard modelling can be a method of geospatially estimating hazard intensity and extent, thereby informing risk calculations.  Previous volcanic resilience engagement in Taranaki, and the global evidence base, suggests that robust and inclusive co-development of lahar risk knowledge underpins effective resilience planning.  We aim to test this hypothesis by evaluating the utility of different lahar risk assessment methods in informing the development of risk information for emergency management and stakeholder use.  This research aims to understand the relationship between the scientific development of lahar risk assessment methods and end user requirements when using these assessments to identify targeted risk reduction strategies.  To achieve this, we will identify and evaluate what risk knowledge is most useful for end users in emergency and critical infrastructure asset management.
Here, we present the initial stages of this PhD research, where we critically evaluate the use of commonly applied lahar hazard models in risk assessments that directly inform risk management strategies.  We will assess whether these hazard models provide data that meaningfully contributes to our understanding of dynamic, systemic risk.

