# Developing quantitative predictive models of ignimbrite sheet architecture: a case study of the Abrigo Ignimbrite, Tenerife

**^^Leah Gingell^1^^^ , David Brown^1^, Richard Brown^2^, Amanda Owen^1^**

<!-- more -->> - **Affiliations:** ^1^ School of Geographical & Earth Sciences, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, UK; ^2^Department of Earth Sciences, Durham University, Durham, UK 

> - **Presentation type:** Poster

> - **Presentation time:** [Tuesday 16:30 - 18:30](../sessions_comparison.md#__tabbed_2_6), [Room Poster Hall](../maps_venue.md#__tabbed_1_1)

> - **Poster Board Number:** [165](../map_poster_boards.md#tuesday)

> - **Programme No:** 3.5.24

> - [Theme 3](../theme3.md) > [Session 5](../sessions/session-3-5.md)

--- 

:fontawesome-solid-book: **Abstract**

Ignimbrites are the deposits of pyroclastic density currents (PDCs), which constitute significant hazards at active volcanoes.  There have been numerous recent advances in ignimbrite architecture and the sedimentation of ignimbrites, however, we know very little about PDC behaviour and ignimbrite architecture at the "basin-scale". 
Basin-scale models are essential in interpreting sedimentary successions and reducing uncertainty in assessing geological resources in basins. By studying the deposits in these basins we can gain insights into past terrestrial environments, climate change, tectonics and base level. Resultant deposits can vary significantly in time and space and have a multitude of different characteristics. These models use a 'systems-based' approach whereby palaeogeographic models of the basin are developed based on statistical information on characteristics such as palaeocurrent trends, grain size, channel-body and storey thickness.
The architecture of the pyroclastic (and associated sedimentary) units deposited in large-volume eruptions is complex. However, by employing a quantitative systems-based approach to recent to ancient large-volume ignimbrite sheets, we can identify spatial and temporal trends and develop quantitative predictive models of distal "basin-scale" processes. This approach allows quantitative evaluation of numerous ignimbrites and effectively considers their interaction with accommodation space and response to changing base level. These analogues can then be applied to understanding the hazards posed by volcanism and the response to such catastrophic events at modern volcanoes. This work presents preliminary observations from the Abrigo Ignimbrite of Tenerife, Canary Islands, Spain.

