# Formation of obsidian by resorption of volatiles during slow cooling

**Ed Llewellin^1^, Patrick Sullivan^1^, Fabian Wadsworth^2^, Jason Coumans^1^, Madeleine Humphreys^1^, Kate Dobson^3^, Tegan Havard^4^, Anja Allabar^5^, Marcus Nowak^5^, Richard Brooker^6^, James Gardner^7^, Thomas Connolly^8^, Halim Kusumaatmaja^9^, Ceri Allgood^10^**

<!-- more -->> - **Affiliations:** ^1^Durham University, UK; ^2^LMU, Germany; ^3^University of Strathclyde, UK; ^4^University of Liverpool, UK; ^5^University of Tuebingen, Germany; ^6^University of Bristol, UK; ^7^University of Texas at Austin, USA; ^8^Diamond Light Source, UK; ^9^University of Edinburgh, UK; ^10^Lancaster University, UK.

> - **Presentation type:** Poster

> - **Presentation time:** [Monday 16:30 - 18:30](../sessions_comparison.md#__tabbed_1_6), [Room Poster Hall](../maps_venue.md#__tabbed_1_1)

> - **Poster Board Number:** [221](../map_poster_boards.md#monday)

> - **Programme No:** 3.6.25

> - [Theme 3](../theme3.md) > [Session 6](../sessions/session-3-6.md)

--- 

:fontawesome-solid-book: **Abstract**

The very glassy nature of obsidian has led to the idea that it is formed through rapid cooling. The near absence of vesicles, however, is problematic, as it requires complete degassing and outgassing of the parent melt. Here we show that dense obsidian can be produced by resorption of bubbles during slow cooling. We performed *in-situ* experiments in which melt with low H~2~O content was first heated (lowering solubility) then cooled (raising solubility) during 3D tomographic imaging. Data for the solubility-driven growth and resorption of bubbles were used to validate a numerical model of the process. We use the model to explore the conditions under which rhyolitic melt can resorb bubbles completely during cooling, to form dense obsidian. At atmospheric pressure, melt with low initial gas fraction φ≈0.05 (typical of lava formed by sintering) can form obsidian at relatively fast cooling ≈10^-4^ K/s, corresponding to cooling from eruption temperature to the glass transition temperature *T~g~* in around a month. Under the same conditions, melt with higher initial gas fraction φ≈0.3 (typical of lava formed by outgassing of a permeable foam) can form obsidian at cooling rate ≈10^-5^ K/s, corresponding to cooling to *T~g~* in around a year. Modelled resorption timescales are consistent with observations from natural obsidian lavas. Our results indicate that resorption is a viable mechanism for the removal of bubbles during obsidian formation and demonstrates that cooling must be slow enough to allow gas to resorb, challenging the popular idea that obsidian requires 'fast' cooling.

