# Neogen volcanism in the NE Iberian Peninsula: Magmatic systems, origin and evolution (NEOVOLC project)

**Guillem Gisbert^1,2^, Dario Pedrazzi^3^, ^^Meritxell Aulinas^^ ^1,2,4^, Esteban Glazel^5^, Sean McClenaghan^6^**

<!-- more -->> - **Affiliations:** ^1^Departament de Mineralogia, Petrologia i Geologia Aplicada, Universitat de Barcelona, Marti Franquès s/n, 08028 Barcelona ^2^Geomodels Research Institute. Universitat de Barcelona, Martí Franquès s/n, 08028 Barcelona ^3^GEO3BCN, CSIC, Lluís Solé i Sabarís s/n, 08028 Barcelona, Spain ^4^Volcanic Petrology and Geochemistry, UB, Unidad Asociada al CSIC por el GEO3BCN. Barcelona, Spain  ^5^Department of Earth and Atmospheric Sciences, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14850, USA ^6^Trinity College Dublin, School of Natural Sciences, Department of Geology, College Green, Dublin 2, Ireland

> - **Presentation type:** Poster

> - **Presentation time:** [Thursday 16:30 - 18:30](../sessions_comparison.md#__tabbed_3_6), [Room Poster Hall](../maps_venue.md#__tabbed_1_1)

> - **Poster Board Number:** [19](../map_poster_boards.md#thursday)

> - **Programme No:** 3.7.26

> - [Theme 3](../theme3.md) > [Session 7](../sessions/session-3-7.md)

--- 

:fontawesome-solid-book: **Abstract**

The Catalan Volcanic Zone (CVZ), located in the northeast of the Iberian Peninsula, is an intraplate monogenetic volcanic field  in the region of interaction between the opening of the Western Mediterranean and the European Rift System. Despite being a key area for understanding the interrelation between magmatism and tectonics in monogenetic volcanic systems, fundamental questions remain unanswered:   What processes control magma's ascent and its stagnation in depth? How have the magmatic systems in the region evolved over time? How are these processes connected to the opening of the Western Mediterranean and the European Rift System?
The NEOVOLC project addresses these questions through a multidisciplinary approach that integrates petrology and geochemistry of magmas, geochronology of the erupted volcanic products and  structural data. Special attention is conferred to the interaction between the magmatic system and regional tectonics to understand its influence on the eruptive style and frequency of eruptions.
The results will contribute to advancing the understanding of the volcanism of the CVZ and its global implications in other intraplate volcanic zones. In addition, they will provide key information to properly assess the volcanic hazard of the area and support the risk management of this active volcanic zone.

