# Morphometric Analysis of Scoria Cones in Kula Volcanic Field (western Anatolia, Türkiye) Using Elliptic Fourier Descriptors and Fractal Dimension Metrics

**Göksu Uslular^1^, Efe Akkaş^2^, M. Korhan Erturaç^3^, ^^Gonca Gençalioğlu Kuşcu^4^^^**

<!-- more -->> - **Affiliations:**  ^1^ Polar Research Institute, TÜBİTAK Marmara Research Center, Gebze-Kocaeli, Türkiye; ^2^ Department of Geological Engineering, Hacettepe University, Ankara, Türkiye; ^3^ Institute of Earth and Marine Sciences, Gebze Technical University, Kocaeli, Türkiye; ^4^ Department of Geological Engineering, Muğla Sıtkı Koçman University, Muğla, Türkiye 

> - **Presentation type:** Talk

> - **Presentation time:** [Thursday 15:00 - 15:15](../sessions_comparison.md#__tabbed_3_2), [Room S160](../maps_venue.md#__tabbed_1_2)

> - **Programme No:** 3.7.4

> - [Theme 3](../theme3.md) > [Session 7](../sessions/session-3-7.md)

--- 

:fontawesome-solid-book: **Abstract**

Scoria cone morphology provides insights into eruption mechanisms and post-depositional processes in monogenetic volcanic fields. While differences between cones can be identified using basic morphological parameters derived through conventional methods, determining the physical factors behind these variations remains complex. Recent contour-based studies have advanced the understanding of erosional processes and relative dating of cones shaped predominantly by hydrometeorological factors.
This study uses Elliptic Fourier Descriptors (EFD) and Fractal Dimension (FD) metrics to analyze scoria cone erosion in the Kula Volcanic Field. Contours extracted from medium-resolution (~30 m) Digital Elevation Models (DEMs) of the selected cones were analysed to calculate Average Erosion Index (AEI) and FD values. Results indicate distinct erosion patterns across cones of different age groups. Older cones (β4; ~ 1-2 Ma) exhibit the highest AEI (22.9 ± 3.2) and FD (1.38 ± 0.01), reflecting prolonged effects of the surface modification processes on irregular/complex contour structures. Medial cones (β3; 50 -- 300 ka) display moderate AEI (19.3 ± 3.1) with slightly lower FD (1.34 ± 0.01), likely stabilised by vegetation. Younger cones (β2; < 50 ka) have the lowest AEI (8 ± 2) but similar FD (1.35 ± 0.01) to medial cones, suggesting comparable primary volcanic or environmental processes.
The findings highlight the potential usage of EFD and FD metrics for characterising erosional processes in scoria cones. Further studies using high-resolution DEMs and machine learning for predicting metrics and understanding the interrelations between different parameters are essential for refining these methods and exploring the regional impacts of climatic and hydrometeorological conditions.

