# Continuous subaerial mapping of hydrothermal outflow in Milos: the new view from visible and infrared drone imaging.

**^^Jean-Emmanuel Martelat^^ ^1^, ^^Thibault Cavailhes^^ ^2^,  ^^Philippe Grandjean^^ ^1^, ^^Sylvain Augier^^ ^1^, ^^Sophie Passot^^ ^1^, ^^Pascal Allemand^^ ^1^, ^^Escartín Javier^^ ^3^, ^^Nomikou Paraskevi^^ ^4^, ^^Konstantina Bejelou^^ ^4^**

<!-- more -->> - **Affiliations:** ^1^Laboratoire de Géologie de Lyon (LGLTPE), Université de Lyon 1, ENSL, UMR CNRS 5276, Villeurbanne France; ^2^EPOC, Université de Bordeaux, UMR CNRS 5805, Pessac, France; ^3^Laboratoire de Géologie, Ecole Normale Supérieure, PSL Research University, UMR CNRS 8538, Paris, France; ^4^Department of Geology and Geoenvironment, National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, Athens, Greece

> - **Presentation type:** Talk

> - **Presentation time:** [Thursday 10:45 - 11:00](../sessions_comparison.md#__tabbed_3_4), [Room R290](../maps_venue.md#__tabbed_1_1)

> - **Programme No:** 3.8.2

> - [Theme 3](../theme3.md) > [Session 8](../sessions/session-3-8.md)

--- 

:fontawesome-solid-book: **Abstract**

Milos is an island of the Aegean volcanic arc developed during plio-quaternary transtensive tectonics. The island displays ground deformation, seismic activity, historical phreatic explosions and is the most important high-enthalpy geothermal field in Greece (Liakopoulos 1987; Fytikas 1989). The area contains indications of hydrothermal activity, including gas and liquid emissions (onshore: altered soils, local mineralization, hot soils and fumarolic vents; offshore: bubbling vents, bacterial mats and precipitates).
 To characterize the subaerial and underwater near-shore hydrothermal circulations in space we conducted an extensive aerial drone survey from Kalamos headland to Agia Kyriaki and Psaravolada bays, acquiring visible and infrared (IR) photomosaics. Regional qualitative T°C maps were obtained, corrected using landmarks of known emissivity. IR images highlight the morphologies of T°C anomalies, that correspond to  diffuse, localized, elongated, circular zones of activity, and that have been correlated  with geological features (e.g. fault-zone, fault-rocks, fractures,  silification and argilitization). At the metric-scale,  we document both local T°C gradients and highly localized T°C anomalies . At regional-scale, thermal anomalies generally strike either N-S (Zephyria graben orientation) or NW-SE until the Agia Kyriaki bay (Fyriplaka graben orientation). NE-SW orientations are also visible (Main Cycladic Lineament, see Cavailhes et al., 2025).  Our modern, multi-scale, multi-methods and integrated mapping defines an heterogeneous regional thermal scheme which is tectonically-controlled, i.e.  where preferential hydrothermal pathways and zones of potential hydrothermal fluid accumulation have been characterized.
References
-Cavailhes et al., 2025 "IAVCEI25-abstract"
-Fytikas 1989, doi:10.1016/0375-6505(89)90060-6 
-Liakopoulos 1987, Univ.-Paris-6 Thesis Researchgate.net -weblink

