# Exploration and Characterization of Copper-Silver Mineralization in the Ighrem Inlier: Case of the New Ouarmdaz deposit.

**Ayoub Aboutarouk^1^, Saida Alikouss^1^, Zouhir Baroudi^1^, Omar Zafaty ^2^, Mohamed Ennabir^3^, Mohamed Abidi^3^, Mohamed Samir^1^.**

<!-- more -->> - **Affiliations:**  ^ ^ ^1\  ^Hassan II University of Casablanca, Faculty of Sciences Ben M\'sick, Department of Geology, Geosciences and Applications Laboratory. B.P. 7955, Sidi Othmane, Casablanca, Morocco.   ^2^  Hassan II University of Casablanca, Faculty of Sciences Ben M\'sick, Department of Geology, Laboratory of Applied Geology, Geo-informatics and Environment, B.P. 7955, Sidi Othmane, Casablanca, Morocco. ^3 ^ Managem group, Twin Center, Tower A, Angle Boulevards Zerktouni and Al Massira Al Khadra BP 5199, Casablanca, Morocco. 

> - **Presentation type:** Poster

> - **Presentation time:** [Tuesday 16:30 - 18:30](../sessions_comparison.md#__tabbed_2_6), [Room Poster Hall](../maps_venue.md#__tabbed_1_1)

> - **Poster Board Number:** [26](../map_poster_boards.md#tuesday)

> - **Programme No:** 4.1.17

> - [Theme 4](../theme4.md) > [Session 1](../sessions/session-4-1.md)

--- 

:fontawesome-solid-book: **Abstract**

   The Anti-Atlas belts are globally recognized for their world-class metallic ore deposits, particularly their significant copper reserves. Over 200 copper occurrences have been identified within the Neoproterozoic to Cambrian cover of the Moroccan Anti-Atlas. The increasing interest of mining companies in these potential copper resources necessitates a more comprehensive understanding of these mineralization.
   Ouarmdaz is one of Sediment-Hosted Copper Deposit located southwest of the Precambrian Ighrem inlier. It is hosted along the contact between the Precambrian basement and the infracambrian cover Tata-Taroudant group, approximately 168 km east of the city of Agadir.
Exploration field works in the study area have uncovered stratiform, vein-type, and cavity mineralization within the infracambrian formations (Tamjout dolomite and lower limestones). The stratiform mineralization includes copper carbonates (Malachite and Azurite) and chalcopyrite, ranging in size from millimeters to centimeters. The vein mineralization comprises massive chalcopyrite with a quartz-calcite gangue. The structures were mainly oriented NE-SW, with a dip of 30--50° toward the southwest.
Mineralization in this area is mainly characterized by copper carbonates, including malachite, azurite and occasionally chrysocolla, along with sulfides such as chalcopyrite, galena, bornite and iron oxides. Secondary paragenesis is more abundant than primary ore, with malachite being the most prevalent mineral phase, occurring as coatings, filling fractures, and cavities alone or in combination with azurite, chalcocite, and iron oxides.
**Keywords:** Ore deposits , Stratiform mineralization, Sediment-Hosted, Igherm, Anti-Atlas.

