# The contradiction between lithospheric thermal and seismic structures reveals a nonsteady thermal state -- A case study from Northeast China

**Chaoqiang Chen，Lijuan He**

<!-- more -->> - **Affiliations:** State Key Laboratory of Lithospheric and Environmental Coevolution, Institute of Geology and Geophysics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100029, China

> - **Presentation type:** Poster

> - **Presentation time:** [Tuesday 16:30 - 18:30](../sessions_comparison.md#__tabbed_2_6), [Room Poster Hall](../maps_venue.md#__tabbed_1_1)

> - **Poster Board Number:** [15](../map_poster_boards.md#tuesday)

> - **Programme No:** 5.1.21

> - [Theme 5](../theme5.md) > [Session 1](../sessions/session-5-1.md)

--- 

:fontawesome-solid-book: **Abstract**

The nature of the lithosphere, as the outermost layer of the solid Earth, has long been a focus of the Earth sciences. Many methods have been used to study the properties and structure of the lithosphere, including gravity, magnetism, electricity, seismic, and geothermics. Since the 1970s, a coupled heat-flow heat-production steady-state model has been employed to study the thermal structure of the continental lithosphere and has helped researchers explain many geothermal observations. However, the steady-state model does not work well in some areas. Taking Northeast China as a case study, we calculated the lithospheric thermal structure, compared the result with seismic research, and concluded that the lithospheric thermal state is nonsteady in the southern Songliao Basin, the southern Greater Xing'an Range and the Changbai Volcano. The lithosphere in southern Songliao Basin features a hot top and a cold bottom. The lithosphere in southern Greater Xing'an Range and the Changbai Volcano feature a cold top and a hot bottom. Our numerical simulation has demonstrated that the response of surface heat flow to thermal disturbance at the bottom of the lithosphere often lags by more than 20 Myr, resulting in a significant disparity between the thermal structure calculated based on surface heat flow and the velocity structure of seismic waves. In addition, this study of the thermal structure in Northeast China shows that the temperature of the Moho in the Songliao Basin is very high (>600°C), which may be an important cause of the lack of Cenozoic volcanism in the Songliao Basin.

