# Geothermal Exploration of Gran Canaria Island (Canary Islands) using Ambient Noise Attenuation Tomography

**Iván Cabrera-Pérez^1^, Luca D'Auria^2,3^, Jean Soubestre^1^, Monika Przeor^2^, David Martínez van Dorth^2^, Germán D. Padilla^3^ and Nemesio M. Pérez^2,3^.**

<!-- more -->> - **Affiliations:** ^1^ University of Geneva, Department of Earth Sciences, Geneva, Switzerland ^2^ Instituto Volcanológico de Canarias (INVOLCAN), 38600 Granadilla de Abona, Tenerife, Canary Islands, Spain ^3^ Instituto Tecnológico y de Energías Renovables (ITER), 38600 Granadilla de Abona, Tenerife, Canary Islands, Spain

> - **Presentation type:** Poster

> - **Presentation time:** [Tuesday 16:30 - 18:30](../sessions_comparison.md#__tabbed_2_6), [Room Poster Hall](../maps_venue.md#__tabbed_1_1)

> - **Poster Board Number:** [3](../map_poster_boards.md#tuesday)

> - **Programme No:** 5.1.9

> - [Theme 5](../theme5.md) > [Session 1](../sessions/session-5-1.md)

--- 

:fontawesome-solid-book: **Abstract**

Gran Canaria is the third-largest island by area and height of the Canary Islands, with two distinct geological regions: the oldest region in the southwest (Paleo-Canarias), and the earliest in the northeast (Neo-Canarias), where all Holocene volcanic eruptions occurred. Due to its volcanic history, Gran Canaria may have geothermal resources that could enhance renewable energy in the Canary Islands. This study aims to use Ambient Noise Attenuation Tomography (ANAT) to obtain a high-resolution intrinsic attenuation model and identify anomalies linked to active geothermal reservoirs. To implement ANAT, 28 temporary broadband seismic stations were deployed, and data from the permanent seismic network operated by INVOLCAN were also used. We followed the methodology described by Cabrera-Pérez et al. (2024). First, standard data processing was applied to retrieve Empirical Green's functions (EGF) from ambient noise cross-correlations. Intrinsic attenuation for each EGF was calculated across multiple frequencies using the lapse-time dependence method, which evaluates attenuation based on coda window length at different onsets of the cross-correlation coda. Next, 2D attenuation maps for various frequencies were derived using linear inversion with sensitivity kernels. Finally, depth inversion was performed to obtain 1D attenuation models for multiple geographic points, interpolated into a 3D mesh. Preliminary results show high-attenuation zones in the eastern and southern parts of the island, coinciding with anomalies observed in previous geophysical, which could be related to active/fossil geothermal reservoirs.
Cabrera-Pérez, et al. (2024). 3-D intrinsic attenuation tomography using ambient seismic noise applied to La Palma Island (Canary Islands). Scientific Reports, 14(1), 27354.

