# Far-travelled ash megaturbidite fed by shoreline-crossing pyroclastic currents from the Kos Plateau Tuff eruption. IODP Expedition 398, Hellenic Arc Volcanic Field

**^^Tim Druitt^^ ^1^, Abigail Metcalfe^1^, Katharina Pank^2^, Steffen Kutterolf^2^, Jonas Preine^3^, Karim Kelfoun^1^, Christian Hübscher^4^, Paraskevi Nomikou^5^, Thomas Ronge^6^, and IODP Expedition 398 scientists.**

<!-- more -->> - **Affiliations:**  ^1^University Clermont-Auvergne, Laboratoire Magmas et Volcans, Clermont-Ferrand, France; ^2^GEOMAR Helmholtz Centre for Ocean Research Kiel, Kiel, Germany; ^3^Department of Geology and Geophysics, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution, Woods Hole MA, USA; ^4^Institute of Geophysics, University of Hamburg, Hamburg, Germany; ^5^Department of Geology and Geoenvironment, National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, Athens, Greece; ^6^International Ocean Discovery Program, Texas A&M University, College Station TX, USA. 

> - **Presentation type:** Poster

> - **Presentation time:** [Tuesday 16:30 - 18:30](../sessions_comparison.md#__tabbed_2_6), [Room Poster Hall](../maps_venue.md#__tabbed_1_1)

> - **Poster Board Number:** [79](../map_poster_boards.md#tuesday)

> - **Programme No:** 6.2.15

> - [Theme 6](../theme6.md) > [Session 2](../sessions/session-6-2.md)

--- 

:fontawesome-solid-book: **Abstract**

Explosive eruptions from island volcanoes deliver huge quantities of ash to the marine environment. While many of the transport pathways are understood, those from shoreline-crossing or submarine pyroclastic currents, and the water-supported gravity flows into which they transform, are not. We report the discovery during IODP Expedition 398, of an ash megaturbidite up to 200 m thick buried deep in the rift basins of the South Aegean Volcanic Arc. The 80 cubic km of ash derives from the 161 thousand-year-old Kos Plateau Tuff (KPT) caldera-forming eruption 120 km to the east, as shown by offshore-onshore chemical correlation of glasses and minerals. The marine ash forms a chemically homogeneous graded bed that lacks internal bioturbation. This implies an emplacement time of less than the several months to years typically required for seabed re-population by burrowing organisms. We propose that the ash bed sedimented from a stream of eruption-fed turbidity currents that travelled westwards 120 km from the Kos eruptive center down arc-parallel slopes to the rift basins. These basins at the time were deep bathymetric troughs that captured the Kos-derived turbidity currents, allowing great thicknesses of ash to accumulate far from the eruption source. The megaturbidite increases the total erupted volume of the KPT eruption to >200 cubic km (uncompacted), suggesting that eruption volumes for other island or coastal explosive eruptions may also be underestimated. The study highlights how large volcanic eruptions re-mould sea floor landscapes, lay down ash megabeds, and destroy seafloor biota on island-arc-wide scales in short-lived, catastrophic events.

