# Rapid detection of faults and fractures using drone magnetometry: Insights from the Grindavík hazard zone, Reykjanes Peninsula, Iceland

**^^Elisa Johanna Piispa^^ ^1^, Catherine Rachel Gallagher^1,2^, Gunnlaugur Magnús Einarsson^3^, Sindri Bernholt^1^, Katrín Ásta Karlsdóttir^3^, Ögmundur Erlendsson^3^, Irma Gná Jóngeirsdóttir^3^, Alexandra Kristín Hafsteinsdóttir^3^, Birgir Vilhelm Óskarsson^4^, Rosemary Philippa Cole^1^, Hannah Iona Reynolds^1^, and Robert Alexander Askew^1,4^**

<!-- more -->> - **Affiliations:** ^1^University of Iceland, Reykjavik, Iceland; ^2^HS Orka, Kópavogur, Iceland; ^3^Iceland GeoSurvey (ÍSOR), Kópavogur, Iceland; ^4^Natural Science Institute of Iceland, Garðabær, Iceland  

> - **Presentation type:** Poster

> - **Presentation time:** [Tuesday 16:30 - 18:30](../sessions_comparison.md#__tabbed_2_6), [Room Poster Hall](../maps_venue.md#__tabbed_1_1)

> - **Poster Board Number:** [63](../map_poster_boards.md#tuesday)

> - **Programme No:** 6.3.22

> - [Theme 6](../theme6.md) > [Session 3](../sessions/session-6-3.md)

--- 

:fontawesome-solid-book: **Abstract**

The renewed tectonic and volcanic activity in Reykjanes Peninsula also resulted in significant faulting, fracturing, and graben formation in the town of Grindavík in November 2023 and January 2024. This posed risk to infrastructure and public safety, particularly through the formation of sinkholes, subsidence, and surface instability. Effective mitigation of this activity required rapid and accurate mapping of the structures in the subsurface. 
Drone-based magnetometry provides a novel possibility for detecting and characterizing subsurface faults, sinkholes and fractures. By measuring magnetic anomalies caused by contrasts between nonmagnetic features, such as sinkholes and fractures, and highly magnetic basaltic lavas, this technique can efficiently map hazardous areas, even in challenging terrain.
This study highlights the application of drone magnetometry in the Grindavík hazard zone. By integrating magnetometry with complementary datasets such as InSAR and DEMs, we provided insights into the fault and fracture systems associated with the graben formation. The results demonstrate the method's usefulness in rapid-response scenarios, which are essential for informed hazard assessments, decision making, and risk mitigation in tectonically active regions.

