# Wildfire mapping triggered by volcanic activity: impact on Stromboli Island during the 2019 summer by using Remote Sensing Data

**^^ Francesca Iacono^^ ^1^, Marina Bisson^1^, Claudia Spinetti^2^, Tom Kwasnitschka^3^**

<!-- more -->> - **Affiliations:** ^1^Istituto Nazionale di Geofisica e Vulcanologia -- Sezione di Pisa, Pisa, Italy ^2^Istituto Nazionale di Geofisica e Vulcanologia - ONT, Roma, Italy ^3^GEOMAR Helmholtz Centre for Ocean Research Kiel, Kiel, Germany 

> - **Presentation type:** Poster

> - **Presentation time:** [Tuesday 16:30 - 18:30](../sessions_comparison.md#__tabbed_2_6), [Room Poster Hall](../maps_venue.md#__tabbed_1_1)

> - **Poster Board Number:** [64](../map_poster_boards.md#tuesday)

> - **Programme No:** 6.3.23

> - [Theme 6](../theme6.md) > [Session 3](../sessions/session-6-3.md)

--- 

:fontawesome-solid-book: **Abstract**

Active volcanic environments, such as Stromboli (Aeolian Islands, Italy), are often affected by secondary hazardous phenomena as wildfires triggered by explosive activity. Such secondary hazard are able to cause  damages in the surrounding human settlements, cultivation and  huge losses of vegetation. This study identifies and maps the burnt areas during the 2019 summer explosive activity. Between 2^nd^ July and 5^th^ September, two paroxysms, along with intense explosive activity, caused extensive wildfires, affecting vegetation and the inhabited Ginostra village. Landsat-8, Sentinel-2, and Pléiades satellite data have been processed to calculate the spectral indexes NDVI and NBR. Such index identified burnt areas making the difference of NDVI and NBR maps between pre- and post- paroxysm (3^rd^ July). The 3 maps of burnt areas obtained by satellite data were compared with the burnt areas mapped  by using a very high spatial resolution drone imagery. Fire-outbreaks were also detected between 4^th^ July and 5^th^ September, due to the high explosive activity during such period and due to the second paroxysm occurred on 28^th^ August. As Stromboli is a popular tourist destination, this study offers an useful tool for mitigating volcanic secondary hazards, such as wildfires.

