# Long-term continuous monitoring of diffuse CO2 emission from the summit cone of Teide volcano, Canary Islands, Spain

**Daniel D'Nardo^1^, Germán D. Padilla^1,2^, Eleazar Padrón ^1,2^, Nemesio M. Pérez^1,2^, Pedro A. Hernández^1,2^, Luca D'Auria^1,2^, Gladys Melián^1,2^**

<!-- more -->> - **Affiliations:** (1) Instituto Volcanológico de Canarias (INVOLCAN), Puerto de la Cruz, Tenerife, Canary Islands, Spain.   (2) Instituto Tecnológico y de Energías Renovables (ITER), Granadilla de Abona, Tenerife, Canary Islands, Spain. 

> - **Presentation type:** Poster

> - **Presentation time:** [Tuesday 16:30 - 18:30](../sessions_comparison.md#__tabbed_2_6), [Room Poster Hall](../maps_venue.md#__tabbed_1_1)

> - **Poster Board Number:** [67](../map_poster_boards.md#tuesday)

> - **Programme No:** 6.3.26

> - [Theme 6](../theme6.md) > [Session 3](../sessions/session-6-3.md)

--- 

:fontawesome-solid-book: **Abstract**

Tenerife Island (2,034 km^2^), the largest of the Canary Islands, is characterized by three volcanic rifts zones: NSRZ, NERZ and NWRZ, and a central caldera hosting the Teide-Pico Viejo volcanic complex. With the aim of strengthening volcanic monitoring and providing a multidisciplinary approach to the monitoring of the Teide volcano, a continuous monitoring of diffuse CO~2~ emissions was implemented. To do so, a geochemical station was installed at the base of the summit cone in 1999 following the accumulation chamber method to record the continuous diffuse CO~2~ efflux. It also records meteorological and soil physical parameters. Measurements are made on an hourly basis 24 hours a day. The 1999-2024 time series show strong variations of the diffuse CO~2~ efflux values ranging between 0 (non-detectable) and 62.8 kg∙m^-2^∙d^-1^, with a mean value of 4.88 kg∙m^-2^∙d^-1^. To define the relations between CO~2~ efflux and environmental variables and to use these relations to filter out the effects of environmental variables on the measured CO~2~ efflux time series, a MRA filtering was performed. From middle 2001 a significant increase of seismic activity was recorded, especially during 2004, characterized both by an increase in the number of small earthquakes, mostly along the NWRZ and along the southern part of the NWRZ. We interpreted these signals as "early warning" associated to the 2004 volcanic unrest. A similar behavior was observed for the periods 2006-2009, 2014-2016 and 2020-2022, always followed by an increase in the local seismicity at Tenerife and the occurrence of seismic swarms. 

