# Insights into the Colli Albani caldera: current ground deformation and susceptibility to debris flows analysis

**^^Lisa Beccaro^^ ^1^, Marina Bisson^2^, Roberto Gianardi^2^, Laura Colini^1^, Alessandro Galvani^1^, Vincenzo Sepe^1^, Cristiano Tolomei,^1^ Claudia Spinetti^1^**

<!-- more -->> - **Affiliations:** ^1^ Istituto Nazionale di Geofisica e Vulcanologia, ONT, Via di Vigna Murata 605, 00143 Roma, Italy  ^2^ Istituto Nazionale di Geofisica e Vulcanologia, Sezione di Pisa, Via Cesare Battisti 53, 56125 Pisa, Italy  

> - **Presentation type:** Poster

> - **Presentation time:** [Tuesday 16:30 - 18:30](../sessions_comparison.md#__tabbed_2_6), [Room Poster Hall](../maps_venue.md#__tabbed_1_1)

> - **Poster Board Number:** [61](../map_poster_boards.md#tuesday)

> - **Programme No:** 6.3.20

> - [Theme 6](../theme6.md) > [Session 3](../sessions/session-6-3.md)

--- 

:fontawesome-solid-book: **Abstract**

Colli Albani (Italy) is an active caldera with seismic swarms, ground deformations and gas emissions located mainly in the southwestern part of the volcanic district, where the last phreatomagmatic expressions arisen about 27 ka ago. Moreover, several types of landslides, among which the most common are debris flows, affect frequently the volcanic complex. Therefore, the volcanic risk is not negligible. This contribution aims to display the results obtained within the INGV funded SIMCA project in terms of ground deformation and debris flow susceptibility. The former were obtained through the application of a multi-temporal SAR Interferometry technique exploiting Cosmo-SkyMed and Sentinel-1 data, acquired from 2016 to 2023. Results were validated using GNSS measurements allowing identify that the only signal that could be related to volcanic activity is the 1.5 mm/yr uplift, confined to the southwestern part of the caldera, at the Genzano di Roma municipality. The uplift rate appears to be smaller than that found out in previous works, suggesting no magma emplacement within the crust at least during recent years. In addition, the debris flows susceptibility of the volcanic complex was obtained through a heuristic approach combining morphometry elements, lithology and land cover, parameters recognized as the main predisposing factors to slope instability. The resulting susceptibility map, validated through historical landslides, classifies the entire complex according to five degrees of susceptibility, identifying Tuscolano-Artemisio caldera edge, Mt. Faete, and steep slopes of Nemi and Albano lakes at high and very high susceptibility.

