# Tailored transport and deposition forecasting of volcanic emissions for field campaigns: Results from the VOLCOM campaign at Sakurajima volcano, Japan

**Alexandros P. Poulidis^1,2^, ^^Simon Thivet^^ ^3^, Simon Bittner^1^, Andreas Richter^1^, Masato Iguchi^4^, Mihalis Vrekoussis^1,5,6^**

<!-- more -->> - **Affiliations:** ^1^Institute of Environmental Physics (IUP), University of Bremen, Germany; ^2^Sakurajima Volcano Research Center (SVRC), DPRI, Kyoto University, Japan; ^3^Physical Volcanology and Geological Risk, University of Geneva, Switzerland; ^4^Professor Emeritus, Kyoto University, Japan; ^5^Center of Marine Environmental Sciences (MARUM), University of Bremen, Germany; ^6^Climate and Atmosphere Research Center (CARE-C), The Cyprus Institute, Cyprus

> - **Presentation type:** Poster

> - **Presentation time:** [Thursday 16:30 - 18:30](../sessions_comparison.md#__tabbed_3_6), [Room Poster Hall](../maps_venue.md#__tabbed_1_1)

> - **Poster Board Number:** [261](../map_poster_boards.md#thursday)

> - **Programme No:** 6.4.8

> - [Theme 6](../theme6.md) > [Session 4](../sessions/session-6-4.md)

--- 

:fontawesome-solid-book: **Abstract**

Field campaigns are critical for understanding the Earth system. Given their cost and complexity, precise knowledge of target phenomena is crucial. Dynamical downscaling during campaigns can offer high-resolution forecasts to aid decision-making and improve success rates. This study introduces a probabilistic forecast algorithm tailored for volcanic emission field campaigns, demonstrated using data from the Volcanic Emissions Observation and Modeling (VOLCOM) campaign at Sakurajima, Japan, in November 2023. Sakurajima was selected for its prolonged activity and proximity to a densely populated area (>1 million residents within 20 km). Recent increases in SO~2~ emissions and reduced explosive activity provided ideal conditions for ground-based mobile Differential Optical Absorption Spectroscopy (DOAS) observations, used to validate forecasts from the Weather Research and Forecasting (WRF) and FALL3D models. During the campaign, SO~2~ emissions were monitored, revealing strong signals (Slant Column Density >10^18^ molecules cm^-2^). Comparisons of DOAS observations with forecasts showed good agreement, with Pearson coefficients of 0.54--0.64 when knowledge of the emission height was excluded and up to 0.92 when it was considered. These results underscore the value of high horizontal resolution for accurately simulating local circulations and highlight the importance of scenario-based forecasting to capture anticipated conditions. This approach significantly contributed to the VOLCOM campaign's success, demonstrating the potential of tailored forecasts to enhance field campaign outcomes.

