# Particle-based model for lava flows with fluid-solid phase transition

**Vito Zago ^1^; Giuseppe Caruso ^2^; Eleonora Amato ^1,3^; Damiano Agnello ^1^; Ciro Del Negro ^1^**

<!-- more -->> - **Affiliations:** ^1^ Osservatorio Etneo, Istituto Nazionale di Geofisica e Vulcanologia, Catania, Italy. ^2^ Dipartimento di Ingegneria Elettrica Elettronica e Informatica, University of Catania, Catania, Italy. ^3^ Department of Mathematics and Computer Science, University of Palermo, Palermo, Italy.

> - **Presentation type:** Poster

> - **Presentation time:** [Tuesday 16:30 - 18:30](../sessions_comparison.md#__tabbed_2_6), [Room Poster Hall](../maps_venue.md#__tabbed_1_1)

> - **Poster Board Number:** [39](../map_poster_boards.md#tuesday)

> - **Programme No:** 6.5.8

> - [Theme 6](../theme6.md) > [Session 5](../sessions/session-6-5.md)

--- 

:fontawesome-solid-book: **Abstract**

Lava flows exhibit a strong dependence on temperature, which influences both the viscosity and the occurrence of phase transitions. The latter are a key factor in the evolution of the flow, determining the final emplacement, and the formation of geological features like lava channels and tubes. Lagrangian models offer significant potential for detailed simulations of lava flows because they efficiently handle highly irregular, dynamic free surfaces and complex phase interfaces, such as those between solid and liquid states.
In this work, we present a threedimensional numerical model that combines Smoothed Particle Hydrodynamics (SPH) with the Lattice Spring Method (LSM) to simulate two-way phase transitions between solid and fluid phases. The model includes thermal conduction to account for heat exchange within the flow and with the ground, as well as surface heat exchanges to capture cooling effects due to radiation and air convection. The model is able to take into accont a temperature trange for the phase transiton, defined by solidus and liquidus temperatures, typical of mixtures, as lava is. This approach allows for the formation of a "mushy" region, where solid and liquid phases coexist. Our model captures the mechanical aspects of this transition which enables the simulation of a deformable crust whose strength varies with temperature. We apply this model to illustrative volcanic scenarios, demonstrating its ability to effectively capture the phase transitions within lava flows. These results underscore the importance of accurate phase transition modeling in understanding the complex behavior of lava flows in real-world volcanic contexts.

