# The toxic effect of volcanic soil nanoparticules, imogolite and halloysite, nanoparticles on macrophages

**^^Latifa Sarra Kazi Tani^^ ^1,2,^, Raphael Serduc^3,4^, Noémie Quesnel^3^, Anouk Marsal^5^, Gaëlle Uzu^4^ et CHARLET Laurent^1^.**

<!-- more -->> - **Affiliations:** ^1^ Université Grenoble Alpes, Université Savoie Mont Blanc, CNRS, IRD, Université Gustave Eiffel, ISTerre, 38058 Grenoble, France  ^2 ^Ecole Supérieure en Sciences Biologiques d\'Oran, Oran, Algérie ^3^ INSERM UA07 Synchrotron Radiation for Biomedicine - STROBE ^4 ^ Université Grenoble Alpes ^5^ Univ. Grenoble Alpes, CNRS, INRAE, IRD, Grenoble INP, IGE

> - **Presentation type:** Poster

> - **Presentation time:** [Monday 16:30 - 18:30](../sessions_comparison.md#__tabbed_1_6), [Room Poster Hall](../maps_venue.md#__tabbed_1_1)

> - **Poster Board Number:** [22](../map_poster_boards.md#monday)

> - **Programme No:** 6.6.10

> - [Theme 6](../theme6.md) > [Session 6](../sessions/session-6-6.md)

--- 

:fontawesome-solid-book: **Abstract**

Several diseases can result from excessive exposure to (nano)particles, including podoconiosis, the second most common cause of tropical lympheodemia. This "medical geology" disease is caused by childhood exposure to irritant particles, such as imogolite and halloysite nanotubes, derived from volcanic glass and ash particles, found in volcanic soil, and accumulation of such particles in the legs and feet lymph nodes of poor bare foot farmers. This neglected tropical disease currently affects 4 million people worldwide. Our study explores the cell viability of NR8383 macrophages after exposure to different concentrations of imogolite and halloysite nanotubes. To achieve our objectives, NR8383 macrophage cells were exposed to imogolite and halloysite nanotubes at various concentrations for durations of 1, 4, 8, 12, and 24 hours. The macrophage viability as a function of particle concentration is explore using MTT test at a wavelength of 550 nm, in a dose response way. Macrophages appear to degrade imogolite nanotubes. In contrast, for halloysite, we noted a progressive decrease in cell viability as the concentration increased, indicating the toxic effect of halloysite on macrophages. These two nanotubes may activate distinct biological pathways which will be discussed, i.e. different cellular toxicity responses to low and high levels of nanotube.

