# Volcanic Risk Ranking of the Southern Volcanic Zone of the Andes using open data

**^^Luigia Sara Di Maio^^ ^1^, María-Paz Reyes-Hardy^1^, Angie Stephania Ramirez Huerta^1^, Lucia Dominguez^1^, Corine Frischknecht^1^, Leticia Freitas Guimarães^2^, Amiel Nieto-Torres^3^, Manuela Elissondo^4^, Álvaro Amigo^5^, Sebastián García^4^, Pablo Forte^6^, and Costanza Bonadonna^1^**

<!-- more -->> - **Affiliations:** ^1^ Department of Earth Sciences, University of Geneva, Rue des Maraîchers 13, 1205 Geneva, Switzerland. ^2^ Departamento de Geologia, Instituto de Geociências, Universidade Federal da Bahia, R. Barão de Jeremoabo, s/n - Ondina Salvador - BA, 40170-290, Brasil. ^3^ Millennium Institute on Volcanic Risk Research - Ckelar Volcanoes, Avenida Angamos 0610, Antofagasta, Chile. ^4^ Servicio Geológico Minero Argentino, SEGEMAR, Av. General Paz 5445 (colectora) Parque Tecnológico Miguelete Edificio 25. Piso 1 (Of 112) Buenos Aires, San Martin B1650KNA Argentina. ^5^ Servicio Nacional de Geología y Minería, Red Nacional de Vigilancia Volcánica, Carlos Cardona Idarraga Rudecindo Ortega 03850, Temuco, Chile. ^6^ Observatorio Argentino de Vigilancia Volcánica (OAVV), SEGEMAR, CONICET, Av.Gral Paz 5445 Parque Tecnológico Miguelete. Edificio 25. Piso 1 (Of A1-03) Buenos Aires, San Martin B1650 WAB, Argentina. 

> - **Presentation type:** Poster

> - **Presentation time:** [Friday 16:30 - 18:00](../sessions_comparison.md#__tabbed_4_6), [Room Poster Hall](../maps_venue.md#__tabbed_1_1)

> - **Poster Board Number:** [99](../map_poster_boards.md#friday)

> - **Programme No:** 6.7.11

> - [Theme 6](../theme6.md) > [Session 7](../sessions/session-6-7.md)

--- 

:fontawesome-solid-book: **Abstract**

This work presents a new risk ranking (VRR) methodology applied to the volcanoes of the Southern Volcanic Zone of the Andes (SVZA), located between Chile and Argentina. The new VRR takes advantage of a new framework for constructing open-source regional databases considering multiple categories of critical assets in a multi-hazard volcanic context. Sources and data quality are assessed using a scoring system and a qualitative scale. The methodology considers four risk factors, i.e., hazard, exposure, vulnerability, and resilience, and can be achieved using a combination of 2, 3, and 4 factors depending on the study's overall objective. In fact, the application of the new VRR yields various outcomes tailored to decision-makers needs. It provides three levels of analysis: 1) the volcanic threat accounting for the hazard and exposure factors (2-factor VRR), 2) the relative volcanic risk by considering the hazard, exposure, and vulnerability factors (3-factor VRR), and 3) the degree of resilience existing around a volcano testing all four factors (4-factor VRR). The resilience factor evaluates the presence or absence of mitigation and response measures around a volcano. Therefore, the 4-factor VRR highlights volcanoes with measures promoting preparedness and strengthening capacities and identifies those that might need more attention. This VRR allows the identification of the highest-threat volcano, the relatively highest-risk volcano, and the volcano requiring the development of mitigation strategies at regional scale independently of borders.

