# Fatalities associated with Pyroclastic Density Currents: Insights from an updated global dataset

**Fathia Lutfiananda^1^, Eliza S. Calder^1^, Samantha L. Engwell^2^**

<!-- more -->> - **Affiliations:** ^1^ School of GeoSciences, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK; ^2^ British Geological Survey, Edinburgh, UK

> - **Presentation type:** Poster

> - **Presentation time:** [Friday 16:30 - 18:00](../sessions_comparison.md#__tabbed_4_6), [Room Poster Hall](../maps_venue.md#__tabbed_1_1)

> - **Poster Board Number:** [91](../map_poster_boards.md#friday)

> - **Programme No:** 6.7.7

> - [Theme 6](../theme6.md) > [Session 7](../sessions/session-6-7.md)

--- 

:fontawesome-solid-book: **Abstract**

Pyroclastic density currents (PDCs) are considered one of the most fatal volcanic hazards, with recent disasters in Merapi (2010), Sinabung (2014-2016), Fuego (2018), and Semeru (2021) emphasising the continued threat that PDCs pose to human life. Due to high uncertainty in PDC behaviour, quantifying PDC hazards remains a challenge in disaster risk reduction, making efforts to minimise human exposure and vulnerability essential. Analysis of data on fatalities from past PDC events can improve our understanding of PDC impacts across different flow types, magnitudes, and volcanic contexts. In particular, the spatial relationships between flow paths, population locations and evacuations routes influence the outcomes. This study aims to enrich and update data on PDC-related fatalities by conducting a comprehensive review of published literature, maps, eruption records, news sources, and official press releases to build a detailed dataset of PDC characteristics and their impacts on human life. Preliminary findings indicate that between 1500 and 2023, at least 93 volcanic eruptions resulted in fatalities related to PDCs. A third of these incidents (34) occurred before 1900, with the remaining incidents occurring in the past century. Among these 93 incidents, 65 were located in East-Southeast Asia and Oceania. The most lethal event was Mount Pelée in May 1902, where at least 28,000 fatalities occurred, while, the August 1883 Krakatau PDC was notable for the distance travelled with fatalities recorded up to 47 km from the eruption point. Other key conclusions from the preliminary study will be presented.

