# Sulfur scrubbing and remobilization at Poás: Implications for gas monitoring at volcanic lakes

**^^Maarten de Moor^^ ^1,2^, Alejandro Rodríguez^1^, Jaime Barnes^3^, Geoffroy Avard^1^, Jeff Cullen^3^, Alessandro Aiuppa^4^**

<!-- more -->> - **Affiliations:** ^1^Observatorio Vulcanológico y Sismológico de Costa Rica, Universidad Nacional, Heredia, Costa Rica ^2^Department of Earth and Planetary Sciences, University of New Mexico, Albuquerque, NM, USA ^3^Department of Earth and Planetary Sciences, University of Texas, Austin, TX, USA ^4^Dipartimento DiSTeM, Università di Palermo, Palermo, Italy

> - **Presentation type:** Poster

> - **Presentation time:** [Friday 16:30 - 18:00](../sessions_comparison.md#__tabbed_4_6), [Room Poster Hall](../maps_venue.md#__tabbed_1_1)

> - **Poster Board Number:** [82](../map_poster_boards.md#friday)

> - **Programme No:** 6.8.8

> - [Theme 6](../theme6.md) > [Session 8](../sessions/session-6-8.md)

--- 

:fontawesome-solid-book: **Abstract**

Gas monitoring using in-situ MultiGAS stations at Poás volcano has shown that key gas ratios (SO~2~/CO~2~ and H~2~S/SO~2~) change with eruptive activity and geophysical signals. However, interpreting these correlations requires understanding of complex sulfur dynamics in hydrothermal-magmatic systems. The latest cycle of lake growth and disappearance between 2019 and 2024 at Poás provides an opportunity to investigate sulfur scrubbing. During this period we estimate that ~118 ktons S was degassed to the atmosphere as SO~2~, compared to ~68 ktons of elemental S deposited by the lake, and ~65 ktons emitted by flank springs as dissolved sulfate. The lake itself is an ephemeral S sink containing <15 ktons S as dissolved bisulfate. Therefore, at least half of the SO~2~ released from the magma is scrubbed by the hydrothermal system. Elemental S is likely generated by both H~2~S oxidation and SO~2~ disproportionation, as evidenced by decreasing H~2~S/SO~2~ and decreasing SO~2~/CO~2~ during lake growth.  Eruptive episodes at Poás are associated with high SO~2~/CO~2~ , likely due to increased magmatic SO~2~ input. However, CO~2~- SO~2~-H~2~S systematics suggest that revolatilization of elemental S and dissolved bisulfate could be significant processes during eruptive degassing. Sulfur isotopes should be a powerful tool for distinguishing between magmatic gas and secondary gases produced by scrubbing/remobilization processes. To this end we have collected time-series plume and fumarole samples to determine the sulfur isotope compositions of both SO~2~ and H~2~S, as well as samples of secondary products, which we will present to further investigate dynamic changes in sulfur processing at Poás.

