# CO2 and CH4 fluxes from Congro and Santiago volcanic lakes (São Miguel, Azores)

**^^César Andrade ^2^ ,^^  J. Virgílio Cruz ^1,\ 2^ , Letícia Ferreira ^1^ , Franco Tassi ^3,\ 4^ , Fátima Viveiros ^1,\ 2^ , António Cordeiro ^2^ , Diogo Braga ^2^**

<!-- more -->> - **Affiliations:** ^1^Faculdade de Ciências e Tecnologia, Universidade dos Açores, Ponta Delgada, Portugal; ^2^IVAR -- Instituto de Investigação em Vulcanologia e Avaliação de Riscos, Universidade dos Açores, Ponta Delgada, Portugal. ^3^Department of Earth Sciences, University of Florence, Florence, Italy ^4^Institute of Geosciences and Earth Resources, National Research Council of Italy 

> - **Presentation type:** Poster

> - **Presentation time:** [Friday 16:30 - 18:00](../sessions_comparison.md#__tabbed_4_6), [Room Poster Hall](../maps_venue.md#__tabbed_1_1)

> - **Poster Board Number:** [89](../map_poster_boards.md#friday)

> - **Programme No:** 6.8.15

> - [Theme 6](../theme6.md) > [Session 8](../sessions/session-6-8.md)

--- 

:fontawesome-solid-book: **Abstract**

Congro Lake is located in the SW quadrant of the Congro Fissural Volcanic System, the easternmost of the two active fissural systems of São Miguel Island (São Miguel, Azores). Lagoa de Santiago is located on the SE sector of the Sete Cidades central volcano caldera. Both lakes are associated to maar craters, the former corresponding to a crater of broadly circular shape and a diameter of approximately 500 m, and the latter occupying a crater measuring 1.1 km by 0.8 km across. The surface area and maximum depth are equal to 0.04 km^2^ and 22 m, for Congro, and 0.25 km^2^ and 33 m, for Santiago, being the estimated water residence times respectively about 7.3 and 24.5 years.
To measure the CO~2~ and CH~4~ diffusive fluxes two surveys were conducted in both lakes using accumulation chambers. For CO~2~, 65 and 100 measurements were made in Congro, respectively for surveys 1 and 2, and 173 and 140 measurements were carried out in Santiago.  For CH~4~, several transepts were made, each with 6 static floating chambers, totalizing 3 and 6 transepts for Congro and 2 and 6 for Santiago, respectively for the 1^st^ and 2^nd^ surveys. Using the sGs method, CO~2~ flux at Congro range between 0.11 to 0.18 t/d (2.75 t.km^-2^.d^-1^ - 4.74 t.km^-2^.d^-1^) and at Santiago between 0.22 to 1.88 t/d (0.95 t.km^-2^.d^-1^ -- 7.43 t.km^-2^.d^-1^). Instead, extrapolating the measured CH~4~ flux, values are much smaller, being equal to 15.1×10^-6^ kg.m^-2^.d^-1^ and 7.4×10^-6^ kg.m^-2^.d^-1^, respectively for Congro and Santiago lakes.

