# Indigenous placenames of Alaska volcanoes: accessing hidden information for better understanding and communication about hazards

**^^Cheryl E. Cameron^^ ^1^, Matthew W. Loewen^2^**

<!-- more -->> - **Affiliations:** ^1^State of Alaska, Alaska Volcano Observatory, Fairbanks, USA; ^2^US Geological Survey, Alaska Volcano Observatory, Anchorage, USA

> - **Presentation type:** Poster

> - **Presentation time:** [Monday 16:30 - 18:30](../sessions_comparison.md#__tabbed_1_6), [Room Poster Hall](../maps_venue.md#__tabbed_1_1)

> - **Poster Board Number:** [95](../map_poster_boards.md#monday)

> - **Programme No:** 7.1.21

> - [Theme 7](../theme7.md) > [Session 1](../sessions/session-7-1.md)

--- 

:fontawesome-solid-book: **Abstract**

Volcanology increasingly recognizes the inherent value of Indigenous knowledge about volcanoes, as evidenced by ongoing collaborative studies and the formation of IAVCEI's new Indigenous Volcanology Network. Indigenous knowledge is intertwined with language and culture, including placenames. Although Alaska contains 229 federally recognized tribes and more than 20 Native languages, some cultural aspects are common across many Alaska Native groups. Alaska Native placenames for volcanoes may be a word or phrase that directly depicts volcanic phenomenon, or, more often, are a coded word or phrase that is shorthand for an oral history story about that place. As a result, placenames that may initially appear to not contain volcanic meaning can instead bear rich volcanological data. However, in-depth knowledge of the language and culture is required to understand the names. For example, the name "Qana-Tanax̂" from Unangam Tunuu means "which island" and refers to oral history about seeing the island rise from the ocean overnight. Knowledge encoded in placenames and oral history can help our understanding of volcanic history, processes, and hazards, and can also improve communication with Indigenous communities concerning volcanic hazards.
As part of an effort at the Alaska Volcano Observatory to responsibly learn these placenames and their meanings, we have compiled more than 50 Native placenames for Alaska volcanoes. We are building relationships with Native communities to more fully learn and contextualize these names, improving our understanding of volcanic history, processes, and hazards.

