# Volcanic Risk Perception from Mounts Cameroon and Nyiragongo Eruptions, Central Africa

**^^Mabel Wantim^1^^^ , Innocent Badriyo^2^, Fred Asong^1^, Louis Balgawa^2^, Mero Yannah^3^, Kaycho Karume^2^, Peter Nde-Fon^4^,  Bih Amban^1^, Livinus Wayih^1^, Emmanuel Yenshu^5^, Samuel Ayonghe^1^**

<!-- more -->> - **Affiliations:** ^1^Unit of Disaster Risk Management, Department of Environmental Science, University of Buea, Buea, Cameroon ^2^Observatoire Volcanologique de Goma (OVG), Goma, Democratic Republic of the Congo ^3^Institute of Geological and Mining Research (IRGM), Yaounde, Cameroon ^4^Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Buea, Buea, Cameroon ^5^Faculty of Social and Management Sciences, University of Buea, Buea, Cameroon

> - **Presentation type:** Poster

> - **Presentation time:** [Monday 16:30 - 18:30](../sessions_comparison.md#__tabbed_1_6), [Room Poster Hall](../maps_venue.md#__tabbed_1_1)

> - **Poster Board Number:** [86](../map_poster_boards.md#monday)

> - **Programme No:** 7.1.12

> - [Theme 7](../theme7.md) > [Session 1](../sessions/session-7-1.md)

--- 

:fontawesome-solid-book: **Abstract**

Approximately 2,000,000 people are exposed to volcanic risks in communities situated at the flanks of Mounts Cameroon (MC) and Nyiragongo (MN) volcanoes. This study sought to investigate risk perception from four previous eruptions of MC (1959, 1982, 1999, and 2000) and two previous eruptions of MN (1977 and 2002). The study was initiated with co-design workshops held with major stakeholders in the cities of Buea and Goma at the flanks of MC and MN, respectively in 2017. A non-random questionnaire survey was later conducted within 14 and 15 communities in Buea. Three age groups (18 - 30, 31 - 45 and >45 years) were considered. At MC and MN, ≥45% of the sampled participants (with a higher female population) perceived that the sampled eruptions posed a very high risk to the population. In terms of the effects, the age group of 18 - 30 was the least knowledgeable. In terms of direct effect on persons, over 90% of participants at MC and MN attested that they were overcome by fear/panic. On measures to cope with any likely eruption, the following order was established at the flanks of both volcanoes: sensitization of population, use of religious (prayers) and of traditional/indigenous strategies. In terms of future coping strategies, while the males at MC maintained sensitization as the favourite option, 62% of the males at MN opted for traditional/indigenous strategies. The female population at both MC and MN showed a higher preference for religious strategies like prayers.

