# Volcanic Geoheritage of Datça Peninsula, Muğla, Türkiye

**^^Gonca Gençalioğlu Kuşcu^^ ^1^, Göksu Uslular^2^**

<!-- more -->> - **Affiliations:**  ^1^ Department of Geological Engineering, Muğla Sıtkı Koçman University, Muğla 48000, Türkiye; ^2^ Polar Research Institute, TÜBİTAK Marmara Research Center, Gebze-Kocaeli, Türkiye 

> - **Presentation type:** Poster

> - **Presentation time:** [Monday 16:30 - 18:30](../sessions_comparison.md#__tabbed_1_6), [Room Poster Hall](../maps_venue.md#__tabbed_1_1)

> - **Poster Board Number:** [89](../map_poster_boards.md#monday)

> - **Programme No:** 7.1.15

> - [Theme 7](../theme7.md) > [Session 1](../sessions/session-7-1.md)

--- 

:fontawesome-solid-book: **Abstract**

Like other elements of natural heritage, tephra deposits are under the threat of extinction via processes to which human beings can also contribute. We aim to introduce volcanic geoheritage elements of Datça (Muğla), and to make geosite proposals. Muğla region in general, has become by far the most popular destination in Türkiye in terms of both settlement and tourism. In this context, examples of medial tephra on Datça peninsula representing Quaternary Aegean Arc volcanism will be introduced.
Medial Kos Plateau Tuff (KPT) deposits, formed by a submarine caldera collapse 161ka ago in the Kos-Nisyros-Yali volcanic system are located on Datça. The KPT is a rare example for the emplacement of large-volume pyroclastic density current travelling across sea and deposited on land. It is thought to be similar to 1883 Karakatau in terms of emplacement, and Tambora 1815 eruption (VEI 7) owing to its volume (110 km^3^). As the evidence of this active volcanic system, medial KPT on Datça is important for volcanic risk assessment of southwestern Anatolia, and should be preserved. Another medial tephra on Datça is the pumice fall of Kyra eruption (135 ka) of Nisyros. The andesitic pumice lapilli up to 350 cm thick near Knidos pinches out to 60 cm towards the east of the peninsula. The first precise geochronological data for the pre-caldera phase of Nisyros were obtained from these deposits. Çeşmeköy and Belenköy locations quarried for KPT pumice, and Sındıköy location where KPT and Nisyros Kyra fall units are both observed are proposed as geosites.

