# Volcanic Geo Heritage in India: Engaging with the community for transferring geosciences to society through geo education and nature conservation.

**^^Kalpana Chaudhari^1^ ;^^  Maria Cerreta^2^ ;Pasquale De Toro^2^**

<!-- more -->> - **Affiliations:** ^1^Institute For Sustainable Development and Research, ISDR, Mumbai, India; ^2^Department of Architecture, The University of Naples Federico II, Naples, Italy.

> - **Presentation type:** Talk

> - **Presentation time:** [Monday 09:30 - 09:45](../sessions_comparison.md#__tabbed_1_5), [Room R380](../maps_venue.md#__tabbed_1_1)

> - **Programme No:** 7.1.5

> - [Theme 7](../theme7.md) > [Session 1](../sessions/session-7-1.md)

--- 

:fontawesome-solid-book: **Abstract**

Indian subcontinent exhibits imprints of varied geological and volcanic processes through ages and is a storehouse of interesting geological features which are recognized as geo heritage sites. Geological Survey of India has already enlisted some of those locales as National Geological Monuments. However volcanic geo heritage site remains the attraction of geo tourism and geo cultural heritage for the communities around the globe. This presentation focuses on various Volcanic geo heritage sites in India focusing on scientific and social importance. The Deccan Traps continental flood basalt province, more than 65 million years in age and covering more than 500,000 km2 areas of western and central India, contains some 1200 rock-cut caves which are formed due to volcanic process. Ajantha and Ellora caves in the Deccan Basalt Trap are fines example of geo heritage in Asia. The Elephanta, marine caves in Arabian Sea near Mumbai coast in India is example of Marine Volcanic geo heritage site. This presentation focuses on geological understanding of The Ajanta and Ellora Caves and its importance in local economic development, world-renowned historical, cultural, religious and artistic monuments and ancient rock-engineering marvels in India, are also monuments for flood basalt geology and volcanology and ancient volcanic geo-heritage. The presentation also deals with lesson learned in past in Engaging with the community for transferring geosciences to society through geo education and nature conservation. The presentation aims in providing a scientific platform to share recent developments in this emerging field of volcanic geo heritage sites in India and Asia at large.

