# Exploring volcanic hazard perceptions in Andean communities around Quilotoa and Cuicocha volcanoes (Ecuador)

**Pablo Samaniego^1^, Diego Narváez^2^, María Fernanda Troya^3^, Sara Sandemetrio^3^, Fernando Jara^3^, Silvana Hidalgo^4^, Marco Almeida^4^**

<!-- more -->> - **Affiliations:** ^1^ Laboratoire Magmas et Volcans, Université Clermont Auvergne, CNRS, IRD, OPGC, Clermont-Ferrand, France ^2^ Departamento de Geología, Escuela Politécnica Nacional, Quito, Ecuador ^3^ Departamento de Antropología, FLACSO, Quito, Ecuador ^4^ Instituto Geofísico, Escuela Politécnica Nacional, Quito, Ecuador 

> - **Presentation type:** Poster

> - **Presentation time:** [Monday 16:30 - 18:30](../sessions_comparison.md#__tabbed_1_6), [Room Poster Hall](../maps_venue.md#__tabbed_1_1)

> - **Poster Board Number:** [88](../map_poster_boards.md#monday)

> - **Programme No:** 7.1.14

> - [Theme 7](../theme7.md) > [Session 1](../sessions/session-7-1.md)

--- 

:fontawesome-solid-book: **Abstract**

In order to understand the link of the Andean Kichwa communities and their volcanic environment, we focused on two Andean volcanoes (Quilotoa and Cuicocha) sharing a similar volcanological, but different anthropological context. Indeed, these volcanoes are both crater lakes formed by large (VEI 5-6) explosive eruptions at 800 BP for Quilotoa and 3000 BP for Cuicocha. The territory around these volcanoes is occupied by Andean peasant communities, with medium size cities nearby, Cotacachi close to Cuicocha, and Zumbagua close to Quilotoa. In addition, no recent eruptions were reported during the historical and pre-Columbian times. We aimed to understand the community's organization, the land's use and ownership, the ways of inhabiting the landscape, and the existing awareness of volcanic hazards and risks. To achieve these goals, we looked for the cosmological elements of the relationship between the inhabitants and both volcanoes based on the collection of stories and myths. We also explored the roles of the different actors and their interaction in the territory. In spite of the similar volcanological contexts, we identify very different situations in terms of community organization, links with the government agencies, economic activities and understanding of volcanic phenomena. From our research, we stablished different departing points at both places and hence different outreach strategies should be developed to properly communicate volcanic hazards in each context.

