# Geoheritage and digital advocacy: Using online tools to encourage geoconservation

**Sharon Backhouse^1^^,^^ ^ ^^Ajay Wynne Jones^1^^^ , Natalia Puche-Polo^2^, Sergio Alfaya^3^, Alexis Schwartz^1,^ Richard Brown^4^, and Dávila-Harris^5^**

<!-- more -->> - **Affiliations:** ^1^GeoTenerife, Surrey, UK. ^2^University of Granada, Granada, Spain ^3^University of La Laguna, San Cristobal de La Laguna, Tenerife ^4^Durham University, Durham, UK. ^5^Instituto Potosino de Investigación Científica y Tecnológica, ; San Luis Potosí,;  Mexico.

> - **Presentation type:** Talk

> - **Presentation time:** [Monday 09:45 - 10:00](../sessions_comparison.md#__tabbed_1_5), [Room R380](../maps_venue.md#__tabbed_1_1)

> - **Programme No:** 7.1.6

> - [Theme 7](../theme7.md) > [Session 1](../sessions/session-7-1.md)

--- 

:fontawesome-solid-book: **Abstract**

Geosites of volcanic eruptions that suddenly interrupted ancient settlements such as Herculaneum, Pompeii, and Akrotiri represent exceptional geoheritage interests. However, volcanic eruptions before human settlement are also of vital cultural importance. The stratigraphic succession exposed in Puertito de Adeje, South Tenerife, contains some of the best-preserved outcrops of the Adeje and Fañabé ignimbrites from eruptions >1.5Ma. Units of the Adeje ignimbrite show evidence of partial welding, indicative of high-temperature eruption, which is rare in Tenerife and of international scientific interest.
GeoTenerife's open access VolcanoStories 'Sustainable Tourism' project aims to give scientific rigour to local concerns regarding a proposed tourism development on the site.  Through collaboration with local and international students and experts, we reported on El Puertito's ignimbrites to advocate for their preservation in line with local sentiment. Producing various resources - a geological report, an interactive geological map, and landscape photography - highlighting the geoheritage of El Puertito. 
As a direct result, IGME listed El Puertito as a 'High Scientific Value' with a 'High Protection Priority' on the Spanish Inventory of Sites of Geological Interest. Over 2,000 people have signed up to adopt the site and report on threats to the ignimbrites and fall deposits in El Puertito, highlighting their engagement. The previous national record stood at under 200 sponsors.
Accessible research paired with digital tools for advocacy, such as IGME's citizen science "Sponsor a Rock" programme, enables the public to advocate for elements of the abiotic environment, cultivating a geoconservation ethic in the public consciousness.

