# Knowledge co-creation: Lived experiences shared in the local languages for an experiential knowledge-based volcano risk communication

**^^Ma. Mylene Martinez-Villegas^^ , Lucille Rose D. Sanico, April Domiguiano, Mary Laron, Allan R. Loza, Rey M. Lumbang, Faith Tuazon, Angelo O. Abang Linlyn C. Mercader, Jane Marie Viel C. Sugay,  Xyrelle G. Villacote**

<!-- more -->> - **Affiliations:**  Philippine Institute of Volcanology and Seismology-Department of Science and Technology  (DOST-PHIVOLCS)

> - **Presentation type:** Poster

> - **Presentation time:** [Monday 16:30 - 18:30](../sessions_comparison.md#__tabbed_1_6), [Room Poster Hall](../maps_venue.md#__tabbed_1_1)

> - **Poster Board Number:** [81](../map_poster_boards.md#monday)

> - **Programme No:** 7.1.7

> - [Theme 7](../theme7.md) > [Session 1](../sessions/session-7-1.md)

--- 

:fontawesome-solid-book: **Abstract**

Through the years, the importance of language in effective communication for volcano disaster risk reduction has been recognized. In the Philippines, there are many challenges and opportunities brought about by language diversity in volcanic areas. Each volcano with distinct  geology and eruption style, is also home to diverse people and communities, each with its own unique culture. The DOST-PHIVOLCS, through the DANAS Project (Earthquake, Tsunami, and Volcano Disaster Narratives for an Experiential Knowledge-based Science Communication) embarked on a systematic documentation of volcano disaster experiences in the local languages focusing on several active volcanoes- Pinatubo (Kapampangan, Tagalog), Taal (Tagalog), Mayon and Bulusan (two Bicolano variants), Kanlaon (Hiligaynon and Cebuano), and  Hibok-hibok (Cebuano). Through the project, local knowledge and perceptions of volcano hazards and risks as expressed in the local languages were captured during video-documented interviews. These were transcribed and analyzed to be able to select descriptions of volcano phenomena as lived experiences. Selected local-language descriptions were then used together with the technical descriptions that volcanologists normally use. One of the outputs of the DANAS is the co-creation and development of inclusive, culturally sensitive, context-driven volcano information materials in the form of volcano-specific sourcebooks. By integrating local knowledge into risk communication strategies, the end goal is to help communities better understand and prepare for disasters through meaningful tools in the form of familiar materials in the daily-used languages. 

