# The volcanic geoheritage of the Kurile-Kamchatka Arc

**Olga V. Bergal-Kuvikas^1,2^, Anna A. Dolgaya^1^, Karoly Németh^3,4,5^**

<!-- more -->> - **Affiliations:**  ^1^Institute of Volcanology and Seismology FEB RAS, Petropavlovsk-Kamchatsky, Russia; ^2^ Vitus Bering Kamchatka State University, Petropavlovsk-Kamchatsky, Russia; ^3^ Saudi Geological Survey, Jeddah, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia; ^4^ Institute of Earth Physics and Space Science, Sopron, Hungary; ^5^ Volcanic Risk Solutions Massey University, Palmerston North, New Zealand 

> - **Presentation type:** Poster

> - **Presentation time:** [Monday 16:30 - 18:30](../sessions_comparison.md#__tabbed_1_6), [Room Poster Hall](../maps_venue.md#__tabbed_1_1)

> - **Poster Board Number:** [85](../map_poster_boards.md#monday)

> - **Programme No:** 7.1.11

> - [Theme 7](../theme7.md) > [Session 1](../sessions/session-7-1.md)

--- 

:fontawesome-solid-book: **Abstract**

The Kurile-Kamchatka Island Arc (KKIA) is an integral component of the Pacific Ring of Fire, characterized by a complex evolutionary history. This complexity has led to the formation of diverse volcanic structures of various ages and types throughout the Quaternary period. This volcanic landscape, along with subsequent post-volcanic activity, attracts numerous tourists and expert visitors. Nonetheless, significant anthropogenic pressures have adversely affected these volcanic forms, leading to the degradation of primary volcanic structures. Among the 13 nature parks and reserves within the KKIA, only 4 lack active volcanoes or post-volcanic activity. In the 7 nature parks and reserves on Kamchatka, such as Klyuchevskoy, Vilyuchinsky, Kronotsky, and Nalychevo, and two reserves on the Kuriles (Kurilsky, Ostrovnoy), total of 35 volcanoes are situated within protected areas. Notably, Kamchatka alone hosts over 7,000 volcanic structures that have formed during the Quaternary time, in addition to 36 subaerial and 116 submarine volcanoes on the Kuriles. Preserving the volcanic geoheritage of Kamchatka and the Kurile Islands is essential for ensuring these unique natural sites remain available for future generations and specialists. The current conservation policies have proven inadequate in safeguarding volcanic heritage or effectively utilizing it for community-level geohazard resilience development. Successful volcanic geoconservation in this highly volcanically and seismically active region requires co-development, community involvement, and broader inclusion of geohazard experts in conservation efforts.

