# Co-creation for enhanced geohazards awareness and communication, through geosites knowledge

**Rasia Shajahan^1^, Marco Giardino^1^,  Evdokia Tema^1^, Elena Zanella^1^**

<!-- more -->> - **Affiliations:**  ^1^Dipartimento di Scienze della Terra, Università degli Studi di Torino, Via Valperga Caluso 35, 10125, Torino, Italy 

> - **Presentation type:** Poster

> - **Presentation time:** [Monday 16:30 - 18:30](../sessions_comparison.md#__tabbed_1_6), [Room Poster Hall](../maps_venue.md#__tabbed_1_1)

> - **Poster Board Number:** [82](../map_poster_boards.md#monday)

> - **Programme No:** 7.1.8

> - [Theme 7](../theme7.md) > [Session 1](../sessions/session-7-1.md)

--- 

:fontawesome-solid-book: **Abstract**

Geodiversity involves dynamic processes and geological hazards. But it also offers a range of geosystem services, including the cultural and educational benefits of geosites. Since inhabitants and tourists interact directly with geodiversity dynamics and geosystem services, it is crucial to effectively communicate geoscience knowledge and information on geological risk management. Therefore it is important to narrow the gap between science and society by promoting community participation in research on geosites, increasing understanding of their scientific value, geohazards and geosite management. To achieve this, we studied the small volcanic island of Stromboli (Italy), taking into account the various geohazards associated with it, including volcanic eruptions, landslides and tsunamis, as well as its rich geodiversity.
A three-step methodological framework is developed for the effective communication of geoscience knowledge and geohazards through geosite education. We started with the co-creation** **by working on outreach activities and participating in local programs related to geosites. In this way, we could gather local information, learn about their false beliefs/knowledge and understand missing information. The second part is scientific research. This includes the evaluation of the geosites using the Geosite Inventory Form, which guarantees comprehensive documentation and informed decision-making for the management and conservation of geosites. The DPSIR (Drivers, Pressures, States, Impacts and Responses) framework is also being used to develop better geosite conservation and management. The final part is the communication of the obtained results through local community and awareness-raising activities. This helps to dispel panic caused by miscommunication or partial knowledge, particularly in the context of geohazards.

