# Co-creation with Indigenous communities during natural hazards research, education, and engagement

**T.J. Jones^1^, H. Nyce Jr.^2^, G. Williams-Jones^3^, Y. Le Moigne^4^, and D. Nyce^2^**

<!-- more -->> - **Affiliations:** ^1^Lancaster Environment Centre, Lancaster University, Lancaster, UK ^2^Wilp Wilx̱o'oskwhl Nisg̱a'a Institute, Gitwinksihlkw, Canada ^3^Centre for Natural Hazards Research, Department of Earth Sciences, Simon Fraser University, Burnaby, Canada ^4^Natural Resources Canada, Geological Survey of Canada, Vancouver, Canada

> - **Presentation type:** Talk

> - **Presentation time:** [Monday 08:45 - 09:00](../sessions_comparison.md#__tabbed_1_5), [Room R380](../maps_venue.md#__tabbed_1_1)

> - **Programme No:** 7.1.2

> - [Theme 7](../theme7.md) > [Session 1](../sessions/session-7-1.md)

--- 

:fontawesome-solid-book: **Abstract**

Indigenous peoples are widely affected by natural hazards and their history and knowledge can directly inform on past events and mitigation strategies. One way to share such information is through the co-creation and co-production of materials and knowledge. Furthermore, the co-production of Indigenous Knowledge Systems with Western science is increasingly recognized as an important component of education and research. When done correctly, it draws on the strengths of the respective knowledge systems, ensures Indigenous data sovereignty, empowers communities, supports reconciliation, and fosters mutual respect. Furthermore, in the context of natural hazards and volcanology, we illustrate how co-designing and co-teaching courses can effectively enhance knowledge systems. We show that students value the weaving of Indigenous Knowledge with science, both within (Westernised) academic settings and during place-based experiential learning. This blending of Knowledge systems and pedagogical approaches can deepen connections to Indigenous ways of knowing as co-production studies are re-connections to Indigenous history and identity. We conclude by addressing some of the challenges faced and provide actionable solutions.  

