# The possible factors contributing to fatalities and injuries during the 2019 Whakaari/White Island disaster in New Zealand

**Ray Cas^1^**

<!-- more -->> - **Affiliations:** ^1^School of Earth, Atmosphere, Environment, Monash University, Melbourne, Australia

> - **Presentation type:** Poster

> - **Presentation time:** [Monday 16:30 - 18:30](../sessions_comparison.md#__tabbed_1_6), [Room Poster Hall](../maps_venue.md#__tabbed_1_1)

> - **Poster Board Number:** [103](../map_poster_boards.md#monday)

> - **Programme No:** 7.2.15

> - [Theme 7](../theme7.md) > [Session 2](../sessions/session-7-2.md)

--- 

:fontawesome-solid-book: **Abstract**

Volcanologists play a technical role in monitoring and predicting volcanic eruptions. However, as experts, they also have an ethical responsibility to protect lives and property, through advice they give to governmental authorities regarding the dangers, hazards and risks associated with particular volcanoes. The 9^th^ December 2019 explosive eruption of Whakaari/White Island volcano offshore from Whakatane in New Zealand killed 23 tourists and guides, and caused injuries, some life long, to 24 others. Why did authorities allow tourism to and *inside* the crater of this highly explosive remote island volcano? Did the volcanological community adequately inform and warn authorities of the dangers and likelihood of such a deadly eruption occurring when tourists were on the island? Were tourists adequately warned and informed of the history of the volcano, the hazards, dangers and risks faced? Was allowing tourism to Whakaari in support of the local tourism industry a contributing factor? Were tourists advised that if they were killed or injured, litigation against tourism companies and government agencies could not be undertaken because of New Zealand's archaic No Fault public liability policies? Since most tourists are not educated volcanologists, nor lawyers, it is absurd to argue that tourists undertook trips to Whakaari fully informed, because they could not have known of the actual hazards, dangers and risks; not even the guides knew. In summary, how on earth were tourists allowed to go on authorised tours into the crater of a highly explosive volcano from which there was no escape?

