# Communication of volcanic hazard and risk for Decision Making: Lessons Learned from Geohazards studies For Tsunami And Other Geo-Disasters along Coastal Regions.

**^^Kalpana Chaudhari^^ ^1,2^ , Maria Cerreta^3^ , Pasquale De Toro^3^**

<!-- more -->> - **Affiliations:** ^1^Shah And Anchor Kutchhi Engineering College, India; ^2^Institute For Sustainable Development And Research, ISDR, India; ^3^University of Naples Federico II, Italy.

> - **Presentation type:** Poster

> - **Presentation time:** [Monday 16:30 - 18:30](../sessions_comparison.md#__tabbed_1_6), [Room Poster Hall](../maps_venue.md#__tabbed_1_1)

> - **Poster Board Number:** [100](../map_poster_boards.md#monday)

> - **Programme No:** 7.2.12

> - [Theme 7](../theme7.md) > [Session 2](../sessions/session-7-2.md)

--- 

:fontawesome-solid-book: **Abstract**

South Asia is more vulnerable to Geo disasters and impacts of climate changes in recent years. On 26 December 2004 massive waves triggered by an earthquake surged into coastal communities in Asia and East Africa with devastating force. Hitting Indonesia, Sri Lanka, Thailand and India hardest, the deadly waves swept more than 200 000 people to their deaths. To mitigate geo-disasters, marine hazards and rehabilitation during post tsunami period, scientific knowledge is needed, requiring experienced research communities who can train the local population during tsunami rehabilitation. ISDR, AVCCE, India and IAPSO International Commission on Ground water--Sea Water Interactions (CGSI)  and Open University Geology Society, UK (OUGSME) jointly started the initiatives on the problem identifications in management of risks in geo-disasters, tsunami rehabilitation, to investigate problems related to  social-economic and ecological risks and management issues resulting from tsunami and Geo-disaster, to aid mitigation planning in affected areas and to educate scientists and local populations to form a basis for sustainable solutions and decision making. The presentation aims to assess the potential risk, hazard, problems and damage arising from Tsunami in the Asia-pacific and Europe, coastal ecosystems. This presentation reviews the issues of Geo-risks communication, marine-risks communication and decision making along coastal region of Asia-Pacific and  also human influence on the earth system. The recommendations from the experts signify strengthening the cooperation among UNESCO, IUGS, IAHS, Governmental organizations and international organizations for capacity building of local population, scientists/researchers for integration of Geohazards Studies on vulnerability and risk assessments along coastal regions.

