# Exploring Anticipated Evacuation Behavior Among Parents around Mt Rainier, USA

**^^Jessica N. Ghent^^ ^1^, Holly Weiss-Racine^2^, James Christie^3^, Nicole A. Errett^4^, Ann Bostrom^5^, Brendan W. Crowell^6^**

<!-- more -->> - **Affiliations:** ^1^Department of Earth & Space Sciences, University of Washington, Seattle, USA; ^2^United States Geological Survey Cascades Volcano Observatory, Vancouver, USA; ^3^School of Environmental Sciences, University of East Anglia, Norwich, UK; ^4^Department of Environmental & Occupational Health Sciences, University of Washington, Seattle, USA; ^5^Evans School of Public Policy & Governance, University of Washington, Seattle, USA; ^6^School of Earth Sciences, The Ohio State University, Columbus, USA

> - **Presentation type:** Poster

> - **Presentation time:** [Monday 16:30 - 18:30](../sessions_comparison.md#__tabbed_1_6), [Room Poster Hall](../maps_venue.md#__tabbed_1_1)

> - **Poster Board Number:** [112](../map_poster_boards.md#monday)

> - **Programme No:** 7.2.24

> - [Theme 7](../theme7.md) > [Session 2](../sessions/session-7-2.md)

--- 

:fontawesome-solid-book: **Abstract**

Mt Rainier, a heavily glaciated stratovolcano within Washington State, USA, has a history of generating major lahars. The ongoing possibility of high-magnitude flows poses a substantial threat to ~150,000 people downstream, necessitating one of the most dense monitoring networks in the USA. This network includes a purpose-built lahar detection system within some radial valleys as portions of the mountain's west flank comprise unstable, hydrothermally altered rock that renders these catchments vulnerable to a "no-notice" lahar derived from a sudden, non-eruptive slope failure. Consequently, for over 20 years, local schools have performed lahar evacuation drills which are now legally mandated. These have demonstrated that the most effective way to remove students from the lahar inundation zone is on foot. However, parents of school children have reported intentions to retrieve their children during an emergency situation, regardless of evacuation recommendations. Such behavior would place parents in harm's way and obstruct the emergency response. In areas where lahar arrival times are very rapid (<1 hr), parent behavior is an essential consideration for the success of city-wide evacuations.
While many studies have discussed lahar hazards, preparatory efforts, and expected behavior in the region, the rationale behind parents' intentions during school evacuations remains poorly understood. Here we present survey results examining factors contributing to decision-making among this demographic. Surveyed topics include personal perceptions, resources (e.g., food/water/shelter) at evacuation sites, and family reunification plans. These results may help emergency managers better understand and meet the needs of parents in these vulnerable communities.

