# Volcanic Risk Perception in the city of Olot (Garrotxa Volcanic Field, Catalonia)

**Daniela Cerda^1,2^, ^^Adelina Geyer^^ ^1^, Xavier Bolós^1^, Dario Pedrazzi^1^, Meritxell Aulinas^2,3,4^, Xènia Borràs^2^**

<!-- more -->> - **Affiliations:** ^1^GEO3BCN, CSIC, Lluís Solé i Sabarís s/n, 08028 Barcelona; ^2^Department of Mineralogy, Petrology and Applied Geology, University of Barcelona, Faculty of Earth Sciences, Spain; ^3^Geomodels Research Institute, Universitat de Barcelona, 08028, Barcelona, Spain; ^4^ Volcanic Petrology and Geochemistry, UB, Unidad Asociada al CSIC por el GEO3BCN 

> - **Presentation type:** Poster

> - **Presentation time:** [Monday 16:30 - 18:30](../sessions_comparison.md#__tabbed_1_6), [Room Poster Hall](../maps_venue.md#__tabbed_1_1)

> - **Poster Board Number:** [109](../map_poster_boards.md#monday)

> - **Programme No:** 7.2.21

> - [Theme 7](../theme7.md) > [Session 2](../sessions/session-7-2.md)

--- 

:fontawesome-solid-book: **Abstract**

Population growth in volcanically active areas increases the threat of eruptions, yet monogenetic volcanic systems like the Garrotxa Volcanic Field (GVF) in Catalonia are often overlooked in risk assessments. Despite the absence of recent eruptions---the last one occurring in the early Holocene---the GVF remains geologically active. However, misconceptions persist among residents, fostering a false sense of security and reducing risk awareness.
This study examines volcanic risk perception among Olot residents, the central city of the GVF. Surveys, including structured and semi-structured questionnaires, were conducted to assess understanding of volcanic risks and perceived vulnerability to potential volcanic threats. The final aim is also to identify and assess those factors shaping risk awareness. Factors analyzed include technical knowledge, narratives about hazards, trust in authorities, preparedness levels, and demographic variables such as age, education, and socioeconomic status, among others. 
Preliminary results indicate significant correlations between technical knowledge, preparedness, and trust in authorities, highlighting gaps in current risk communication strategies. This work emphasizes the interaction of social, cultural, and individual factors in shaping risk awareness. By addressing these gaps, this research provides actionable recommendations to improve risk communication, enhance preparedness and risk awareness, and strengthen resilience in communities within monogenetic volcanic fields.
We are grateful to the Espai Cràter, the City Council of Olot, and the Parc Natural de la Zona Volcànica de la Garrotxa for their support. This study is partially funded by the project "Living among volcanoes" (FCT-23-19352) and the BECAS CHILE- ANID, Beca Doctorado en el Extranjero, convocatoria 2022/Folio 72220257.

