# Canary Islands Volcanic Risk Reduction Strategy

**Nemesio M. Pérez^1,2^, Luca D'Auria^1,2^, and Pedro A. Hernández^1,2^**

<!-- more -->> - **Affiliations:** ^1^Instituto Volcanológico de Canarias (INVOLCAN), Puerto de la Cruz, Tenerife, Canary Islands, Spain; ^2^Instituto Tecnológico y de Energías Renovables (ITER), Granadilla de Abona, Tenerife, Canary Islands, Spain

> - **Presentation type:** Poster

> - **Presentation time:** [Monday 16:30 - 18:30](../sessions_comparison.md#__tabbed_1_6), [Room Poster Hall](../maps_venue.md#__tabbed_1_1)

> - **Poster Board Number:** [115](../map_poster_boards.md#monday)

> - **Programme No:** 7.2.27

> - [Theme 7](../theme7.md) > [Session 2](../sessions/session-7-2.md)

--- 

:fontawesome-solid-book: **Abstract**

The Canary Islands are the only Spanish territory exposed to volcanic risk. The recent eruption on La Palma has highlighted the exposure and vulnerability of our society to volcanic hazards. As a result, the Tajogaite eruption (2021) should mark a turning point in our management of volcanic risk in the Canary Islands, despite the progress made in the last 25 years to reduce volcanic risk in the archipelago.
This new direction should be adopted through a Canary Islands Volcanic Risk Reduction Strategy, an operational tool that serves as a framework for addressing and responding to the challenges faced by the Canary Islands due to volcanic risk. It would also serve as a driver and coordinator of various sectoral policies and as a means of raising awareness among citizens, businesses, and administrative bodies. Three basic ideas or pillars (scientific knowledge, public engagement, and consensus) will serve as the foundation for the development of this important tool.
Citizen participation would involve inviting all sectors of society that can and should play a role in volcanic risk management (scientists, public administration authorities, politicians, emergency experts, land-use planners, journalists, etc.). The idea behind broad citizen participation is that each sector can debate and provide its perspective on volcanic risk management. The strength of this debate, through a SWOT analysis, lies in the fact that only those observations emerging from consensus can be described.
In summary, our society needs a Canary Islands Volcanic Risk Reduction Strategy because volcanic risk is increasing in our archipelago.

