# Philippine Case Study on Strengthening Multilingual Volcano Risk Communication

**^^Fatima M. Moncada^^ , Ma. Mylene Martinez-Villegas, Jeffrey S. Perez, Joan C. Salcedo**

<!-- more -->> - **Affiliations:** Department of Science and Technology - Philippine Institute of Volcanology and Seismology

> - **Presentation type:** Poster

> - **Presentation time:** [Monday 16:30 - 18:30](../sessions_comparison.md#__tabbed_1_6), [Room Poster Hall](../maps_venue.md#__tabbed_1_1)

> - **Poster Board Number:** [97](../map_poster_boards.md#monday)

> - **Programme No:** 7.2.9

> - [Theme 7](../theme7.md) > [Session 2](../sessions/session-7-2.md)

--- 

:fontawesome-solid-book: **Abstract**

Risk assessment and risk management are distinct, interconnected functions. In the Philippines' polycentric disaster risk management (DRM) system, volcanic risk assessment is a shared responsibility between the national (Philippine Institute of Volcanology and Seismology) and local governments (Local Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Offices), while the latter is responsible for localized strategies like awareness campaigns and community-based early warning systems. This setting requires close coordination, yet communication gaps persist.
Challenges in multilingualism contribute to this problem. Through surveys and focus group discussions, challenges were identified including: 1) diverse languages with varied standardization; 2) dominant languages and minorities; and 3) gaps between expert and public language. These challenges are underpinned by limited capacities. National-level scientists need improved public language skills while local-level officials require technical capacity to cohesively and effectively communicate volcano-related information to communities. It is therefore argued that strengthening multilingualism in volcanic risk communication can lead to more effective DRM strategies.
However, several bills have been proposed to mandate plain language and local languages in risk communication but none have been passed. Recently, Republic Act No. 12027 lapsed into law, discontinuing mother tongue instruction from kindergarten to grade 3. This policy environment therefore underscores the urgent need for national laws supporting multilingual risk communication, with clear standards, structures, and functions of the involved institutions. To achieve this, scientists from warning agencies can take a more active role in identifying policy issues and solutions, working closely with the local partners, academia, and policymakers to develop effective legislation.

