# Asserting the role of volcano observatories in the context of Sendai commitments and Early Warnings for All

**Andrew Tupper^12^, Costanza Bonadonna^3^, Jacob B. Lowenstern^4^, Matthew Hort^5^**

<!-- more -->> - **Affiliations:** ^1^ Natural Hazards Consulting, Melbourne, Australia ^2^ UCL Warning Research Centre, London, UK ^3^ University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland ^4^ United States Geological Survey, Vancouver, USA ^5.^UK Met Office, Exeter, UK

> - **Presentation type:** Poster

> - **Presentation time:** [Monday 16:30 - 18:30](../sessions_comparison.md#__tabbed_1_6), [Room Poster Hall](../maps_venue.md#__tabbed_1_1)

> - **Poster Board Number:** [104](../map_poster_boards.md#monday)

> - **Programme No:** 7.2.16

> - [Theme 7](../theme7.md) > [Session 2](../sessions/session-7-2.md)

--- 

:fontawesome-solid-book: **Abstract**

Nations of the world are committed to improving multi-hazard early warning systems (MHEWS) under the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015-2030.  In 2022, the UN Secretary General additionally announced a major push towards achieving global reach of MHEWS under the Early Warnings For All initiative.  Most attention for MHEWS is directed towards hydrometeorological events, but it is essential that volcanic risks are well managed due to the certainty of future events with the potential for significant to catastrophic impacts. How will we achieve this?
The international aviation community already sets global requirements and recommendations for volcanic monitoring, and the marine and tsunami communities are increasingly developing better standards and recommended practices. To these can be added national best practices for disaster management, agriculture, land transport and other sectors to articulate an *integrated* concept for what the world needs from volcanology.  Gap assessment tools have been developed for meteorology that can be adapted to assess needs and practical actions for volcanology, including legislative mandates, professional staffing levels, standards and competencies, training and research, data, and quality-managed operations to support MHEWS best practices with respect to volcanology.  Most importantly, development of global coordination and resource-sharing arrangements will enable equitable practical implementation of improved volcanic hazards assessment and mitigation despite inequitable resourcing around the world.  The role of IAVCEI, working with UN bodies, is critical in this process.
A workshop will explore many of these issues immediately after the IAVCEI Scientific Assembly.

