# Towards Inclusive Collaboration in Volcanology: Guidelines for Best-Engagement Protocols in International Collaboration

**^^Karen Fontijn^^ ^1^, Maria-Antonia Bornas^2^, Victoria Miller^3^, José Luis Palma^4^, Claudia Inés Rivera^5^, INVOLC working group^6^**

<!-- more -->> - **Affiliations:**  ^1^ Department of Geosciences, Environment and Society, Université libre de Bruxelles, Belgium; ^2^ Philippines Institute for Volcanology and Seismology, The Philippines; ^3^ GNS Science, New Zealand; ^4^ Department of Earth Sciences, University of Concepción, Chile; ^5^ Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, Mexico; ^6^ various affiliations globally

> - **Presentation type:** Talk [Invited]

> - **Presentation time:** [Thursday 16:15 - 16:30](../sessions_comparison.md#__tabbed_3_4), [Room R290](../maps_venue.md#__tabbed_1_1)

> - **Programme No:** 7.3.3

> - [Theme 7](../theme7.md) > [Session 3](../sessions/session-7-3.md)

--- 

:fontawesome-solid-book: **Abstract**

Volcanology is a multidisciplinary science of global interest with specific societal applications in early warning, hazards evaluation and disaster risk reduction and management. Due to its multidisciplinary nature, developments in volcano science are often rooted in collaboration between scientists of various disciplines, often for the goals of geoscientific research, technology development and application and/or capacity-building. Moreover, applied volcanology is also marked by collaborations between scientists and various stakeholders. Collaboration is therefore key in advancing volcanology, both at national and international levels, and may occur between academic institutes, volcano observatories, geological surveys, private or public companies, etc.
The International Network for Volcanology Collaboration (INVOLC) is an IAVCEI network with the specific ambition to enhance volcanology globally through improved international collaboration. IAVCEI--INVOLC was created with a focus on volcano scientists working in resource-constrained contexts, including those based in low- or middle-income countries. After a community-wide online survey and inaugural workshop during which INVOLC's ambitions were discussed, a series of challenges, as commonly experienced by those working in resource-constrained settings, were identified. These challenges may present barriers to participation in volcano science in an international context and are related to both organisational resources and inclusion in research collaborations. We present a series of guidelines for best-engagement protocols in international collaboration in volcanology, that may be adopted during times of quiescence, volcanic unrest and/or an eruption and its aftermath. Our aspiration is that these guidelines will help build more respectful, equitable and sustainable partnerships that will ultimately advance the science of volcanology.

