# The Canary Project: An inclusive course-based undergraduate research experience in mineralogy, petrology, and volcanology

**Marc-Antoine Longpré^1,2^, Franco Cortese^1,2^, Claire Forrest^1^, Jamie Asan^1^, Fabio Dos Santos^1^**

<!-- more -->> - **Affiliations:** ^1^School of Earth and Environmental Sciences, Queens College, City University of New York, New York, NY, USA; ^2^Earth and Environmental Sciences, The Graduate Center, City University of New York, New York, NY, USA

> - **Presentation type:** Poster

> - **Presentation time:** [Thursday 16:30 - 18:30](../sessions_comparison.md#__tabbed_3_6), [Room Poster Hall](../maps_venue.md#__tabbed_1_1)

> - **Poster Board Number:** [277](../map_poster_boards.md#thursday)

> - **Programme No:** 7.3.8

> - [Theme 7](../theme7.md) > [Session 3](../sessions/session-7-3.md)

--- 

:fontawesome-solid-book: **Abstract**

Participation in authentic scientific research positively impacts undergraduate student learning and retention in the sciences, particularly among underrepresented groups, making it a highly recommended teaching strategy. Course-based undergraduate research experiences (CUREs) are more inclusive than independent research experiences, but not all types of research are amenable to such teaching activities. Here we present the design and initial outcomes of the Canary Project, a CURE in a core mineralogy and petrology course at Queens College, City University of New York. The project addresses the research question "What magmatic processes, as recorded by zoning patterns in crystals, lead to renewed eruption at quiescent hotspot volcanoes?" based on the simplicity and power of backscattered electron images acquired on a scanning electron microscope (SEM). Students work in pairs, each assigned a specific historical eruption in the Canary Islands and corresponding thin section and tephra sample. Students participate in research hypothesis design, sample preparation, SEM data collection, data analysis, and dissemination in a poster symposium. A tiered mentoring system involving faculty, graduate students, and experienced undergraduates supports participants throughout the project. A post-pre survey measures student learning outcomes. To date, a diverse pool of 23 students have engaged in the Canary Project, demonstrating improvements in both general scientific and mineralogy-petrology-specific skills. Survey data also indicate enhanced engagement due to the authentic research experience. The Canary Project exemplifies how CUREs can integrate accessible research tools to promote scientific inquiry and build essential skills, fostering inclusivity and deeper engagement in the geosciences.

