# Closing the Digital Accessibility Gap: Digital Inclusion in Volcano Observatory Websites

**^^Vera Pospelova^^ ^1^, Társilo Girona^2^, Inés López-Baldominos^1^, Scott Crass^3^, Dain Harmon^3^**

<!-- more -->> - **Affiliations:** ^1^Computer Science Department, University of Alcalá, Madrid, Spain. ^2^Alaska Volcano Observatory, Geophysical Institute, University of Alaska Fairbanks, Alaska, USA. ^3^Alaska Volcano Observatory, Alaska Division of Geological & Geophysical Surveys, Alaska, USA.

> - **Presentation type:** Poster

> - **Presentation time:** [Thursday 16:30 - 18:30](../sessions_comparison.md#__tabbed_3_6), [Room Poster Hall](../maps_venue.md#__tabbed_1_1)

> - **Poster Board Number:** [276](../map_poster_boards.md#thursday)

> - **Programme No:** 7.3.7

> - [Theme 7](../theme7.md) > [Session 3](../sessions/session-7-3.md)

--- 

:fontawesome-solid-book: **Abstract**

A recent World Health Organization study highlights that one in six people worldwide lives with a disability or special need. Today, most information is shared through public websites, making it available from nearly anywhere. However, to ensure that this information is usable and understandable for everyone regardless of personal conditions such as disabilities or age-related challenges, it must be presented in an accessible format. In this context, digital accessibility (DA) has become a standard approach in information technology, involving the adaptation of content formats to accommodate diverse needs. Ensuring DA is especially critical for governmental agencies responsible for monitoring natural phenomena that can lead to natural disasters, including volcanic eruptions and earthquakes. In this study, we examine the DA of websites from various volcano observatories that provide critical information, including near-real time updates, on volcanic activity and state of unrest during crises. After analyzing different websites layout and structure, non-textual elements, tables, and other important elements,  our analysis reveals that  the design or content format of these websites hinders interaction for users of assistive technologies, such as screen readers (primarily used by blind individuals) and keyboard navigation (used by people unable to use a mouse), among other aspects outlined in DA guidelines and principles. These barriers create difficulties to understand the information related to natural disasters. We hope our analysis will guide governmental agencies and organizations in effectively communicating important information to everyone, including people with special needs, thereby improving preparedness and response efforts for volcanic eruptions.

