# Discovering Iceland's Volcanoes: An Educational Approach to Science Communication

**Virgile Schwartz^1^, Raphaël Rougemont^1^, Eva Wilson^1^, James Grillon^1^, Rémi Colin^1^, Arnaud Baumgart^1^, Théo Favre^1^, Eline Sabatini^1^, Mano Franzetti^1^, Mendamar Othenin-Girard^1^, Tom Von Kaenel^1^, Florian Sflacin^1^, Robin Menu^1^, Yohann Châtelain^1^, Marit van Zalinge^2^, Simon Bufféral^3^, Nicolas Oestreicher^1,\ 4,\ 5^, Tom Sheldrake^1^, Luca Caricchi^1^, Serge Stoll^1^, Lucas Vimpere^1^, Giovan Peyrotty^1^, Joël Ruch^1^**

<!-- more -->> - **Affiliations:** ^1^Department of Earth Sciences, University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland; ^2^Pepperdine University, Hauteville Campus, Switzerland; ^3^Laboratoire de Géologie, Ecole Normale Supérieure, PSL University, Paris, France; ^4^WSL Institute for Snow and Avalanche Research SLF, Davos, Switzerland; ^5^Climate Change, Extremes and Natural Hazards in Alpine Regions Research Centre CERC, Davos, Switzerland 

> - **Presentation type:** Demonstration

> - **Demonstration time:** Check the [SciCom program](../social/demonstrations.md), [Room Esplanade](../maps_venue.md#__tabbed_1_1)

> - **Programme No:** 7.4.18

> - [Theme 7](../theme7.md) > [Session 4](../sessions/session-7-4.md)

--- 

:fontawesome-solid-book: **Abstract**

The Iceland Didactical Project 2024 is an educational initiative led by second-year Bachelor students in Earth and Environmental Science from the University of Geneva, supported by their professors, research group members and SciencEscape, a non-profit science outreach organization. To reduce our CO~2~ footprint of about 40%, we travelled by car and ferry, from Geneva to Reykjavik following the results of an impact study we performed. Once on-site, we met Þorvaldur Þórðarson, volcanologist, and Halldór Geirsson, geophysicist, from University of Iceland, who gave lectures on their field of study on the Reykjanes Peninsula and strengthened links between our mutual universities. Þorsteinn Sæmundsson, landslide specialist, led a fieldtrip to observe the results of the largest landslide recorded in Iceland in historical time. The tipping point of our project was the visit to the Icelandic Meteorological Office. Michelle Parks presented the volcanic events of Sundhnúkurgigar and offered a new perspective on volcanic eruptions and its impact on residents. Another crucial aim of the project is the production of a documentary about the project produced by SciencEscape, screening at UNIGE and at the Scientific Assembly of IAVCEI 2025 in Geneva, strengthening links between academic institutions and the public. Drone and camera footages were taken throughout the whole project, from the departure in Geneva to the ferry route, fieldwork, data collection in the laboratory and data discussion during the courses. By managing all phases of this research project---scientific, logistical, and financial---we gained practical skills and critical insights for academic and professional growth.

