# Tourists\' perception of volcanic hazards and risk in Tenerife, Canary Islands

**Claudia Rodríguez-Pérez^1^, Nemesio M. Pérez^1,2^, Fátima Rodríguez^1^, and Carmen Solana^1,3^**

<!-- more -->> - **Affiliations:** ^1^Instituto Volcanológico de Canarias (INVOLCAN), Puerto de la Cruz, Tenerife, Canary Islands, Spain; ^2^Instituto Tecnológico y de Energías Renovables (ITER), Granadilla de Abona, Tenerife, Canary Islands, Spain; ^3^School of Earth and Environmental Sciences, University of Portsmouth, Portsmouth, UK   

> - **Presentation type:** Poster

> - **Presentation time:** [Thursday 16:30 - 18:30](../sessions_comparison.md#__tabbed_3_6), [Room Poster Hall](../maps_venue.md#__tabbed_1_1)

> - **Poster Board Number:** [281](../map_poster_boards.md#thursday)

> - **Programme No:** 7.4.10

> - [Theme 7](../theme7.md) > [Session 4](../sessions/session-7-4.md)

--- 

:fontawesome-solid-book: **Abstract**

The Canary Islands constitute a volcanically active region where volcanic risk has significantly increased over the past 50 years due to higher population densities and growing socio-economic exposure to volcanic hazards. Understanding the perception of volcanic hazards and risks among societal groups - such as communication professionals, tourists, urban planners, and the general public - is essential for effective volcanic risk reduction strategies. While some groups have specific roles, tourists represent a significant floating population that can contribute to risk management. Annually, the Canary Islands attract 8 to 13 million visitors (National Statistics Institute - INE), highlighting the need to integrate tourists into risk strategies.
This study explores Tenerife's tourist awareness, understanding, and interest in volcanoes and volcanic risk management in the Canary Islands. It also examines their potential and preferred roles in enhancing the effectiveness of volcanic risk reduction efforts.
To achieve these objectives, we designed a face-to-face questionnaire comprising approximately 30 questions, completed in 10 - 15 minutes. About 20% of the questions focus on demographic information, 40% address knowledge of volcanic phenomena and risk management, and the remaining 40% assess tourists' perceptions of volcanic hazards and risks. The survey was conducted in two phases: between July and September 2023 (419 respondents) and in September 2024 (323 respondents), resulting in a total sample of 742 tourists.
The findings of this research will contribute to tailoring communication strategies and risk reduction measures, ensuring that tourists are informed and empowered to actively manage volcanic risks on Tenerife Island and beyond.

