# Be an expert on volcanic degassing

**Fátima Viveiros^1,2^, Vittorio Zanon^1^, Catarina Silva^1,3^, Nuno Cabral^1,3^, César Andrade^1^**

<!-- more -->> - **Affiliations:**  ^1^ Instituto de Investigação em Vulcanologia e Avaliação de Riscos (IVAR), Universidade dos Açores; Ponta Delgada, Portugal; ^2^ Faculdade de Ciências e Tecnologia da Universidade dos Açores, Ponta Delgada, Portugal; ^3^ Centro de Informação e Vigilância Sismovulcânica dos Açores, Ponta Delgada, Portugal 

> - **Presentation type:** Demonstration

> - **Demonstration time:** Check the [SciCom program](../social/demonstrations.md), [Room Esplanade](../maps_venue.md#__tabbed_1_1)

> - **Programme No:** 7.4.14

> - [Theme 7](../theme7.md) > [Session 4](../sessions/session-7-4.md)

--- 

:fontawesome-solid-book: **Abstract**

A quiz table game on volcanic degassing is set up with four levels of questions to be completed to obtain a certificate of expertise. Players roll a dice and answer questions related with four main topics: type and composition of volcanic gas emissions, sampling equipment and analytical techniques, data interpretation, and gas hazards. Different levels of difficulty are set, and players answer questions progressively until they reach the final level, which is rewarded with a certificate. Some questions are illustrated with pictures and are based on study cases from around the world.
If questions are answered correctly, the player can roll the dice again; differently, the player incurs a penalty defined by a set of additional cards, which may include returning to the previous level. A digital certificate is awarded to those who successfully complete the final level.
The game is in English, but can be easily adapted to Portuguese and Italian. There is no limit to the number of players, but a maximum of four players per game is recommended.
Material needed: We will need a table and a computer.

