# Using the Twitch interactive live-streaming platform as a tool to communicate and educate about volcanoes and volcanic hazards.

**Guillaume Mauri ^1^**

<!-- more -->> - **Affiliations:** ^1^ ChappronneuilTV, Consulting Volcanologist, Canton of Fribourg, Switzerland

> - **Presentation type:** Talk

> - **Presentation time:** [Thursday 08:45 - 09:00](../sessions_comparison.md#__tabbed_3_4), [Room R290](../maps_venue.md#__tabbed_1_1)

> - **Programme No:** 7.4.2

> - [Theme 7](../theme7.md) > [Session 4](../sessions/session-7-4.md)

--- 

:fontawesome-solid-book: **Abstract**

Active volcanoes are often viewed on social media as fun places to spend vacations and as a means to gain more followers by posting dramatic photos and videos. Commercial travel agencies also use social media to convince people to travel to an active volcano for spectacular vacations. Social media can also be useful educational tool to communicate about active volcanoes and volcanic hazards. However, creating interactive content is challenging, as is successfully reaching an audience not already looking for volcano-related content.
Twitch's interactive live-streaming service has more than 240 million unique visitors monthly and offers free live-stream services with a live chat. Since the Fall of 2021, L'Hebdo Des Volcans has provided a weekly stream about active volcanoes with the aim of 1) educating about volcanic hazards, 2) explaining eruption processes, and 3) answering viewers' questions. Doing so, viewers gain a better understanding of how to behave and remain safe when traveling to active volcanoes and learn where to find reliable information (e.g., from officials, observatory institutions). A wide range of content is used to make the streaming visually appealing, including photos, videos, social media content, and media articles. This is complemented by scientific articles from volcano observatories, open-access journals, and volcanologist guests to talk about specific topics.
Twitch's interactive live-streaming service is one venue where volcanologists can actively contribute to building trust in science, engage with viewers, and develop new ways to communicate about volcanoes and volcanic hazards

