# MULTI-MAREX: A living lab for improved forecasting and possible actions for multiple extreme geomarine events

**^^Roberto Benavides^^ , Prof. Dr. Heidrun Kopp**

<!-- more -->> - **Affiliations:** GEOMAR Helmholtz Centre for Ocean Research Kiel

> - **Presentation type:** Poster

> - **Presentation time:** [Thursday 16:30 - 18:30](../sessions_comparison.md#__tabbed_3_6), [Room Poster Hall](../maps_venue.md#__tabbed_1_1)

> - **Poster Board Number:** [278](../map_poster_boards.md#thursday)

> - **Programme No:** 7.4.7

> - [Theme 7](../theme7.md) > [Session 4](../sessions/session-7-4.md)

--- 

:fontawesome-solid-book: **Abstract**

Extreme geomarine events, including volcanogenic or seismogenic tsunamis and earthquakes, as well as their cascading events, have serious short- and long-term consequences for coastal communities. Early warning and disaster prevention are both societal and political challenges that the MULTI-MAREX collaborative project, part of the 'Marine Extreme Events and Natural Hazards' research mission of the German Marine Research Alliance (DAM), will address by creating a living laboratory.
This living laboratory will provide opportunities to study extreme geological events and associated hazards in order to develop the knowledge needed to manage these hazards at different levels in Greece.
Enormous changes in the natural environment due to interaction and modification by human activities over the last 250 years have led to increased vulnerability of the infrastructure, economy and surrounding population. The overall objective is not only to characterise geological processes, but also to develo and to ensure more effective early warning systems, and to develop protective measures in close co-design with researchers from different disciplines, working closely with the authorities and the local population, so that everyone in or around coastal communities are effectively informed and protected from extreme events. Through our research and our commitment to knowledge and technology transfer, we make a significant contribution to preserving the function and protection of the ocean for future generations.
GEOMAR is responsible for the communication and coordination between the partner institutions of the joint project, the stakeholders and the DAM, as well as with the funding organisations. 

