# Digital Tools in Volcanic Regions: The Power of INVOLCAN's Social Media

**Daniel Prieto^1^, Andrea Alonso^1^, Rubén García-Hernández^1^, Luca D'Auria^1,2^, Pedro A. Hernández^1,2^, María Asensio-Ramos^1^, David Afonso^1,2^, Héctor de los Rios^1,2^ and Nemesio M. Pérez^1,2^**

<!-- more -->> - **Affiliations:** ^1^Instituto Volcanológico de Canarias (INVOLCAN), Puerto de la Cruz, Tenerife, Canary Islands ^2^Instituto Tecnológico y de Energías Renovables (ITER), Granadilla de Abona, Tenerife, Canary Islands   

> - **Presentation type:** Poster

> - **Presentation time:** [Thursday 16:30 - 18:30](../sessions_comparison.md#__tabbed_3_6), [Room Poster Hall](../maps_venue.md#__tabbed_1_1)

> - **Poster Board Number:** [279](../map_poster_boards.md#thursday)

> - **Programme No:** 7.4.8

> - [Theme 7](../theme7.md) > [Session 4](../sessions/session-7-4.md)

--- 

:fontawesome-solid-book: **Abstract**

Scientific communication should be one of the core pillars of any research institution. For this reason, at the Instituto Volcanológico de Canarias (INVOLCAN), we strive to establish effective communication with society through tools such as social media, in an accessible, direct, and, above all, educational manner. Today, social media is an integral part of a digital, organic, and dynamic ecosystem, where people actively participate in generating and sharing information. Aware of this, we make a continuous effort in public outreach and education to raise awareness among the population living in a volcanically active region, such as the Canary Islands. INVOLCAN's communication strategy is implemented across three platforms: Facebook, Instagram, and Twitter/X. This enables us to create a variety of posts that allow us to reach a broader segment of the public. Through these platforms, INVOLCAN promotes knowledge about volcanic processes, shares updates on volcanic activity in the Canary Islands, and highlights the importance of proper volcanic risk management for the future. We also emphasize the benefits of living with volcanism, such as the geotourism and geothermal development.
Volcanology is an increasingly relevant topic in the communities living on active volcanoes. During volcanic crises, social media becomes essential, as it allows for the rapid and active dissemination of verified information, reducing misinformation and fake news while strengthening the resilience of local communities. In an increasingly digital world, social media stands as an indispensable pillar in enhancing outreach and education on volcanoes and it is clear a clear challenge for INVOLCAN.

