# Journalists, Communication and Volcanic Risk Management in Canary Islands, Spain

**Claudia Rodríguez-Pérez^1^, Nemesio M. Pérez^1,2^, Fátima Rodríguez^1^, and Carmen Solana^1,3^**

<!-- more -->> - **Affiliations:** ^1^Instituto Volcanológico de Canarias (INVOLCAN), Puerto de la Cruz, Tenerife, Canary Islands, Spain; ^2^Instituto Tecnológico y de Energías Renovables (ITER), Granadilla de Abona, Tenerife, Canary Islands, Spain; ^3^School of Earth and Environmental Sciences, University of Portsmouth, Portsmouth, UK   

> - **Presentation type:** Poster

> - **Presentation time:** [Thursday 16:30 - 18:30](../sessions_comparison.md#__tabbed_3_6), [Room Poster Hall](../maps_venue.md#__tabbed_1_1)

> - **Poster Board Number:** [280](../map_poster_boards.md#thursday)

> - **Programme No:** 7.4.9

> - [Theme 7](../theme7.md) > [Session 4](../sessions/session-7-4.md)

--- 

:fontawesome-solid-book: **Abstract**

Effective volcanic risk management requires the coordinated efforts of scientists, authorities, journalists, sociologists, psychologists, and other stakeholders. Within this framework, communication professionals play a critical role in translating complex scientific information into accessible messages, informing the public about volcanic hazards and fostering preparedness. To fulfill these responsibilities, they require not only a solid understanding of volcanoes and risk management strategies but also the ability to critically evaluate these strategies to ensure transparency, accountability, and public trust.
This research aims to assess the level of understanding and interest that media professionals have about volcanoes and volcanic risk management in Spain, and to examine the potential and desired role of the media in enhancing the effectiveness of volcanic risk management efforts.
To evaluate the knowledge, attitudes, and practices of journalists concerning volcanoes, volcanic risk management, and communication in Spain, we developed an online questionnaire. The questionnaire consists of approximately 25 questions and can be completed in about 15 minutes. Approximately 24% of the questionnaire consists of general questions including residence, gender, age and education level. Questions and comments related to volcanoes and volcanic risk management make up approximately 42% of the questionnaire, while the remaining 32% focus on communication and the role of the media in volcanic risk management in Spain. The questionnaire was released on December 26 2022 and by the end of the year 2022, a total of 105 journalists had completed it. Here, we present preliminary results, including qualitative data on the needs and perception related to volcanic risk.

