# Sensing Volcanoes: improving understanding of eruptions through 'hands-on\' experiences

**Jenni Barclay^1^, David Pyle^2^, Karen Pascal^3,4^, Richie Robertson^4^, Stacey Edwards^4^, Pat Joseph^4^, Bridie Davies^5^, James Christie^6^ and Mountainaglow and Sensing Volcanoes Teams^7^**

<!-- more -->> - **Affiliations:** (1) School of Earth Sciences, University of Bristol, England, UK (2) Department of Earth Sciences, University of Oxford, England UK (3) Montserrat Volcano Observatory, Montserrat (4) Seismic Research Centre, University of West Indies, Trinidad (5) School of Earth Sciences, University of Manchester, England, UK (6) School of Environmental Sciences, University of East Anglia, England, UK (7) Mountainaglow and Sensing Volcano Outreach Projects

> - **Presentation type:** Talk [Invited]

> - **Presentation time:** [Thursday 08:30 - 08:45](../sessions_comparison.md#__tabbed_3_4), [Room R290](../maps_venue.md#__tabbed_1_1)

> - **Programme No:** 7.4.1

> - [Theme 7](../theme7.md) > [Session 4](../sessions/session-7-4.md)

--- 

:fontawesome-solid-book: **Abstract**

The spectacle and wonder of volcanic activity are an easy draw for exciting curiosity towards outreach and engagement activities but creating lasting understandings of the processes that drive different types of activity and their consequences for communities at risk is more challenging.
This series of demonstrations shares how we have accessed audiences sense of hearing, smell and touch (as well as sight) to recreate and share important dimensions of changing volcanic behaviour through 'Mountainaglow' and 'SoufriereBlow' in the Eastern Caribbean and 'Sensing Volcanoes' in the UK. To help imagine the difficult choices and sometimes life-changing impacts of eruptions we also share the elements and challenges of a 'serious game' we play with a wide variety of audiences. We have evidence this approach is engaging,  and that it provokes more nuanced understandings of eruptions and their impacts, and stronger empathy with affected populations. However, the act of imagining risk and uncertainty can also provoke stronger (negative) emotional responses to volcanic activity than wonder or curiosity. This can be counterproductive, so we also celebrate the value and strength of positive social and cultural responses to past eruptive events.
We will share the evidence we have for both the value and challenges of working in this way, and the further potential for using arts-based or interdisciplinary approaches to engagement.  Not only in making knowledge of volcanic activity accessible but to support improved social responses to future eruptions.

