# Unveiling Kolumbo: Exploring Submarine Volcanoes and Their Hazards

**Séverine Furst^1^, Maria Blanch Jover^1^, Megan Campbell^1^, Fiene Stoepke^1^, Emma Hadré^2^, Joachim Dengg^1^, Jens Karstens^1^, Gareth Crutchley^1^, Christian Timm^1^, Thies Bartels^1^**

<!-- more -->> - **Affiliations:** ^1^ GEOMAR Helmholtz Center for Ocean Research Kiel ^2^ Institute of Geosciences, Christian-Albrechts-Universität zu Kiel

> - **Presentation type:** Demonstration

> - **Demonstration time:** Check the [SciCom program](../social/demonstrations.md), [Room Esplanade](../maps_venue.md#__tabbed_1_1)

> - **Programme No:** 7.4.12

> - [Theme 7](../theme7.md) > [Session 4](../sessions/session-7-4.md)

--- 

:fontawesome-solid-book: **Abstract**

Dive into the captivating depths of the Aegean Sea with this engaging 20-minute science demonstration, designed to unveil the hidden world of underwater volcanism. Through the WAVES project, we present a customized 3D model of Kolumbo, one of the most active submarine volcanoes in the Christina-Santorini-Kolumbo volcanic field. The model is about 1.2m long and can be taken apart to show the seismic structure beneath the surface. This allows an interactive interpretation of the eruption history.
Located in the Aegean Sea, the Christina-Santorini-Kolumbo volcanic field has explosively erupted over 100 times in the past 650,000 years. Kolumbo was chosen for this demonstration not only because of its geohazard potential but also due to its proximity to Santorini, a globally renowned tourist destination visited by over 2 million people annually. Understanding and monitoring Kolumbo are critical to mitigating risks to coastal communities and visitors alike.
This demonstration showcases methods of marine geosciences that scientists use to investigate beneath the sea, including multibeam imaging and geophysical monitoring techniques and bridging that to societal issues. Participants will gain insight into the risks posed by submarine volcanoes and how research improves prevention and preparedness. The public will explore the fascinating interplay between volcanology and the marine environment, fostering curiosity and critical thinking about natural hazards beneath the waves.
**Practical Details**:
-   **Languages Offered**: English, French, German, Spanish
-   **Duration**: ~20 minute
-   **Materials Needed**: Large table, screen, poster frame

