# Integrating Standardized Volcano Monitoring Data into WOVOdat

**^^Christina Widiwijayanti^1^^^ , Benoit Taisne^1,2^, Fidel Costa^3^, Nang T.Z. Win^1^, Tania Espinosa-Ortega^1^, Christopher G. Newhall^4^, Antonius Ratdomopurbo^5^, and WOVO observatories**

<!-- more -->> - **Affiliations:** ^1^Earth Observatory of Singapore, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore ^2^Asian School of the Environment, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore ^3^Institut de Physique du Globe de Paris, Université Paris Cité, France ^4^Mirisbiris Garden and Nature Center, Albay, Philippines ^5^Geological Agency, Bandung, Indonesia 

> - **Presentation type:** Talk [Invited]

> - **Presentation time:** [Friday 14:45 - 15:00](../sessions_comparison.md#__tabbed_4_4), [Room R290](../maps_venue.md#__tabbed_1_1)

> - **Programme No:** 7.5.3

> - [Theme 7](../theme7.md) > [Session 5](../sessions/session-7-5.md)

--- 

:fontawesome-solid-book: **Abstract**

Volcano monitoring data are essential for understanding volcanic processes, improving eruption forecasts, and mitigating risks. However, the lack of standardized formats and open-access platforms hampers data sharing and collaboration, with many unrest episodes archived in diverse formats, often without metadata. WOVOdat (World Organization of Volcano Observatories Database), hosted by the Earth Observatory of Singapore, addresses these issues by curating global volcanic unrest data into a centralized, standardized, and open-access database. It integrates seismic, deformation, gas, thermal, and other monitoring data, accessible via a web-based platform (***wovodat.org***) for querying, visualization, and download. Complementing this is the Global Volcano Monitoring Infrastructure Database (GVMID), which compiles metadata on monitoring networks, stations, and instruments, enabling global analyses of monitoring capabilities and identifying gaps. These resources facilitate efficient use of datasets to tackle global challenges, such as improving eruption forecasts through statistical analysis of precursory signals, pattern recognition, and unrest comparisons. They support the development of probabilistic eruption models and enhance decision-making during crises. As part of an IAVCEI initiative, the Bulletin of Volcanology has introduced *Data Reports*, a format for publishing monitoring data with DOI assignment and copyright protection. These datasets can be then archived in WOVOdat, enriching its repository. These efforts underscore the transformative potential of open science in volcanology by promoting transparency, collaboration, and innovation. We encourage the global volcano community to contribute to and utilize WOVOdat and GVMID to advance research, forecasting, and crisis management worldwide.

