# Breaking barriers in science: Insights from Latin America's Volcano Observatories dual-language Special Issue

**Oryaëlle Chevrel^\1,2,3^, Pablo Forte^4^**

<!-- more -->> - **Affiliations:**  ^1^Université Clermont Auvergne, Laboratoire Magmas et Volcans UMR 6524 CNRS, OPGC, IRD, 63178 Aubière, France. ^2^Observatoire Volcanologique du Piton de la Fournaise, Institut de Physique du Globe de Paris, 97418 La Plaine des Cafres, France. ^3^Université Paris Cité, Institut de Physique du Globe de Paris, CNRS, 75005 Paris, France. ^4^Observatorio Argentino de Vigilancia Volcánica (OAVV), Servicio Geológico y Minero Argentino (SEGEMAR), Buenos Aires, Argentina 

> - **Presentation type:** Talk [Invited]

> - **Presentation time:** [Friday 15:45 - 16:00](../sessions_comparison.md#__tabbed_4_4), [Room R290](../maps_venue.md#__tabbed_1_1)

> - **Programme No:** 7.5.5

> - [Theme 7](../theme7.md) > [Session 5](../sessions/session-7-5.md)

--- 

:fontawesome-solid-book: **Abstract**

Peer-reviewed articles in international journals remain the foundation of sharing scientific knowledge across the globe. However, these publications are typically written exclusively in English and often come with financial barriers---either requiring fees from readers or charging authors for open access.
In the field of volcanology, Volcanica stands out as the only fully diamond open-access journal, offering peer-reviewed articles at no cost to either authors or readers. This young scientific journal is committed to tackling some of the most significant obstacles in research publication while enhancing the accessibility of published research outputs.
In collaboration with the *Asociación Latinoamericana de Volcanología* (ALVO), Volcanica presents a Special Issue on the critical work conducted by volcano observatories across Latin America---a region where tens of millions of people live under the threat of volcanic activity. Published as Reports, a flagship format tailored for this kind of institutions, the publications are authored by representatives, managers, scientists, and researchers from observatories in the ten Latin American countries currently operating official volcano monitoring programs.
To break down language barriers, each article is available in both English and Spanish. While publishing a dual-language issue adds significant workload for authors, editorial board, and technical teams, it represents meaningful step towards inclusivity. Emerging technologies, such as AI-powered translation tools, could play a pivotal role in simplifying the process of publishing in multiple languages. By bridging linguistic divisions, this effort aims to make research in volcanology and observatory actions accessible to a broader audience, encouraging greater inclusivity and collaboration.

