# Breaking Silos: Collaborative Pathways in Volcanological Technology Development

**Debra Parcheta**

<!-- more -->> - **Affiliations:** CEO, Blue Marble Enterprises, Inc.; Instructor, College of Engineering, Design and Computing, University of Colorado at Denver

> - **Presentation type:** Talk [Invited]

> - **Presentation time:** [Friday 14:15 - 14:30](../sessions_comparison.md#__tabbed_4_4), [Room R290](../maps_venue.md#__tabbed_1_1)

> - **Programme No:** 7.5.1

> - [Theme 7](../theme7.md) > [Session 5](../sessions/session-7-5.md)

--- 

:fontawesome-solid-book: **Abstract**

Despite rapid advancement of powerful tools and methodologies, from machine learning algorithms to sophisticated process modeling and real-time sensor networks, the landscape of technology development in volcanology is often fragmented. Individual researchers and institutions work in silos and peer review systems and competitive pressure keep scientists from sharing data in a timely way. Redundant efforts and slow integration of innovative solutions into broader volcanological practice are the norm.
Drawing on examples of successful interdisciplinary initiatives and crowd sourcing concepts we can showcase how collective innovation in database design, open-source software development, and machine learning applications could accelerate problem-solving and enrich the scientific ecosystem.
There are practical frameworks for fostering collaboration among technology developers in volcanology including establishing centralized repositories for shared code and shared data, creating virtual forums for ongoing dialogue, and setting cross-disciplinary goals to stimulate creative solutions to shared challenges.
We must rethink the way we develop and share data. By embracing collaboration, we can avoid duplication, maximize efficiency, collect more data faster, and speed technological advancements for the benefit of the volcanology community and beyond.
Call for action:  Pictures (with location embedded) of eruptions, especially lava fountains, geysers, and ash plumes are needed now to complete the development of an application that automates estimating the height, width and bubble formation of active events.

