# The Geohazard Digital Twin Component as a means for Open Science in Volcanology

**Hugues Brenot^1^, Simone Atzori^2^, Christian Bignami^2^, Fabrice Brito^3^, Annalisa Cappello^2^, Stefano Corradini^2^, Arnau Folch^4^, Michael Foumelis^5^, Daniela Fucilla^2^, Gaetana Ganci^2^, Pedro Gonçalves^3^, Francesco Guglielmino^2^, Luca Merucci^2^, Leonardo Mingari^4^, Fabrizio Pacini^3^, Francesca Silverli^2^, Cristiano Tolomei^2^, Nicolas Theys^1^, Elisa Trasatti^2^, Salvatore Stramondo^2^**

<!-- more -->> - **Affiliations:** ^1^Royal Belgian Institute for Space Aeronomie (BIRA), Brussels, Belgium; ^2^Istituto Nazionale di Geofisica e Vulcanologia (INGV), Italy; ^3^Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas (CSIC), Barcelona, Spain ^4^ Terradue, Rome, Italy; ^5^Aristotle University of Thessaloniki (AUTh), Greece

> - **Presentation type:** Poster

> - **Presentation time:** [Friday 16:30 - 18:00](../sessions_comparison.md#__tabbed_4_6), [Room Poster Hall](../maps_venue.md#__tabbed_1_1)

> - **Poster Board Number:** [60](../map_poster_boards.md#friday)

> - **Programme No:** 7.5.10

> - [Theme 7](../theme7.md) > [Session 5](../sessions/session-7-5.md)

--- 

:fontawesome-solid-book: **Abstract**

Modern EO (Earth Observation) has dramatically increased our ability to monitor volcanological phenomena. However, there is still a weakness of technological solutions for data access, processing and interpretation, following Open Science principles.
The Digital Twin Components (DTC) are a complex of software and data services needed for Earth System digital replicas. ESA (European Space Agency) supports the latest advances in EO-based science to deploy new DTCs. The Geohazard DTC is one of them, currently under development by INGV, CSIC and BIRA, with the technological support of TerraDue through the GET-it project.
The proposed Geohazard DTC is based on the exploitation of multi-sensor EO data and AI techniques. In particular, it has been designed to leverage Copernicus data and advanced algorithms, for generating information services encompassing the whole spectrum of volcano- (and seismic-) related geohazards.
The main modules available in the Geohazard DTC are:
-   GEOMOD: performs geodetic data direct and inverse modelling;
-   FALL3D: models and forecasts volcanic ash/SO2 clouds;
-   GPUFLOW: models the evolution of lava flows;
-   DAMSAT: performs change detection.
The DTC is planned to serve *What-If Analysis for Disaster Preparedness*, to allow users to assess potential interventions and their impacts on disaster outcomes, thereby enhancing preparedness and mitigation strategies. The engaged stakeholders include policy and decision makers, emergency managers and scientists.
The use cases for the demonstration of the Geohazard DTC prototype are the Mount Etna (Italy) 2018 eruption and the La Palma (Spain) 2021 eruption, and the Central Italy 2016 earthquake sequence.

