# Gales: an open-source volcano simulation toolbox

**^^Deepak Garg^1^^^ ,  Antonella Longo^1^,  Paolo Papale^1^, Michael Redenti^2^, Michele Carpenè^2^, Alessandro Masini^2^**

<!-- more -->> - **Affiliations:** ^1^Istituto Nazionale di Geofisica e Vulcanologia, Sezione di Pisa, Italy; ^2^CINECA - via Magnanelli 6/3, Casalecchio di Reno (BO)

> - **Presentation type:** Poster

> - **Presentation time:** [Friday 16:30 - 18:00](../sessions_comparison.md#__tabbed_4_6), [Room Poster Hall](../maps_venue.md#__tabbed_1_1)

> - **Poster Board Number:** [75](../map_poster_boards.md#friday)

> - **Programme No:** 7.5.23

> - [Theme 7](../theme7.md) > [Session 5](../sessions/session-7-5.md)

--- 

:fontawesome-solid-book: **Abstract**

We present the open-source Volcano simulation toolbox Gales (https://gitlab.com/dgmaths9/gales) that has been under continuous development for the past > 10 years. Gales employs the Finite Element Method to solve partial differential equations (PDEs). It is written in C++ and utilizes the HPC library Trilinos for its implementation. Gales offers several state-of-the-art solvers for a) transient heat transfer; b) compressible-incompressible flow of Newtonian and non-Newtonian fluids; c) static and dynamic response of elastic and viscoelastic materials; d) multiphysics solvers: thermoelasticity and Fluid-Solid Interaction (FSI). The code has undergone thorough benchmarking on various test cases, ranging from engineering benchmarks to problems with analytical solutions. 
Gales includes a suite of models that accurately describe the properties of multi-component, multiphase magmas. The flow solver is capable of modeling magma transfer and mingling from under-saturated magma conditions deep into the crust to rapidly accelerating conditions along volcanic conduits. The solid solver in Gales accounts for rock heterogeneities, free surfaces, and the real topography of volcanic regions. It enables the computation of deformation, stress, strain, and tilt at the Earth's surface
Gales plays a crucial role in several EU projects, including  DT-GEO (https://dtgeo.eu), IMPROVE (https://www.improve-etn.eu/), and KMT (https://kmt.is). Numerical simulation results from applications of Gales to the volcanic environment have led to several original insights into the complex interplays between cooling, crystallization, degassing, and internal dynamics in magma bodies and their associated signals. We invite a broad community of geoscientists interested in simulating a variety of geodynamic processes to use Gales in their research.

