# Network for Observation of Volcanic and Atmospheric Change (NOVAC): Community technology development and implementation for volcanic gas monitoring

**^^Christoph Kern^^ ^1^, Santiago Arellano^2^, Zoraida Chacon^3^, Christopher Hight^1^, Mattias Johansson^4^, Manne Kihlman^5^, Allan Lerner^1^, Christopher Lockett^1^, Agnes Mazot^6^, Maarten de Moor^7^, and the NOVAC Community.**

<!-- more -->> - **Affiliations:** ^1^USGS-USAID Volcano Disaster Assistance Program (VDAP), Vancouver, USA; ^2^Chalmers University of Technology, Gothenburg, Sweden; ^3^Servicio Geológico Colombiano, Manizales, Colombia; ^4^Flame Soft AB, Gothenburg, Sweden; ^5^KEDU AB, Gothenburg, Sweden; ^6^GNS Science, Lower Hutt, New Zealand; ^7^El Observatorio Vulcanológico y Sismológico de Costa Rica, Heredia, Costa Rica

> - **Presentation type:** Poster

> - **Presentation time:** [Friday 16:30 - 18:00](../sessions_comparison.md#__tabbed_4_6), [Room Poster Hall](../maps_venue.md#__tabbed_1_1)

> - **Poster Board Number:** [66](../map_poster_boards.md#friday)

> - **Programme No:** 7.5.15

> - [Theme 7](../theme7.md) > [Session 5](../sessions/session-7-5.md)

--- 

:fontawesome-solid-book: **Abstract**

The Network for Observation of Volcanic and Atmospheric Change (NOVAC) is a community of volcano observatories and research institutions that together develop and apply ultraviolet differential optical absorption spectroscopy (DOAS) instruments to measure volcanic sulfur dioxide (SO~2~) emission rates. The collected data are used for assessment of volcanic activity, eruption forecasting, research on volcanic processes, and studying the atmospheric impact of volcanic degassing. Collectively, the NOVAC institutions run the largest global instrument network for monitoring volcanic gas emissions, monitoring degassing at 54 volcanoes across 20 countries. Here, we review recent developments in remote sensing instrumentation, retrieval methodologies, software packages and data visualization tools stemming from the NOVAC community. Updated scanning DOAS instruments are designed to withstand harsh environmental conditions, including snow, rime ice, and ash fall. Recently developed data-analysis methods allow for correction of radiative transfer errors such as light dilution and take variable plume heights into account. New NOVAC software features allow continuous spectrometer calibration based on the measured position and shape of Fraunhofer lines, as well as quantitative detection of bromine monoxide (BrO) in volcanic plumes. Additionally, novel data-visualization tools allow custom plotting of SO~2~ emission rates from any volcano in the network, as well as direct access to the operational, real-time data. Through joint technology development, regular workshops, and support from organizations such as USAID, UNESCO, and EGU, NOVAC provides a community for partners to share technology, training, and volcanic gas monitoring experience with researchers and engineers from institutions all over the world.

