# Tephra: from reconstructing past eruptions to forecasting and modelling future events -- A Special Publication

**^^Alastair G. E. Hodgetts^^ ^1^, Thomas J. Aubry^2^, Samantha L. Engwell^3^, Paul A. Jarvis^4^, Britta J. L. Jensen^5^**

<!-- more -->> - **Affiliations:**  ^1^ School of GeoSciences, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United Kingdom; ^2^ Department of Earth and Environmental Sciences, University of Exeter, Penryn, United Kingdom; ^3^ British Geological Survey, The Lyell Centre. Edinburgh, United Kingdom; ^4^ GNS Science, Lower Hutt, New Zealand; ^5^ Department of Earth and Atmospheric Sciences, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Canada 

> - **Presentation type:** Poster

> - **Presentation time:** [Friday 16:30 - 18:00](../sessions_comparison.md#__tabbed_4_6), [Room Poster Hall](../maps_venue.md#__tabbed_1_1)

> - **Poster Board Number:** [61](../map_poster_boards.md#friday)

> - **Programme No:** 7.5.11

> - [Theme 7](../theme7.md) > [Session 5](../sessions/session-7-5.md)

--- 

:fontawesome-solid-book: **Abstract**

Tephra produced during explosive eruptions can have devastating consequences on communities and infrastructure. By better understanding its generation, transport and deposition, we can gain further insight into how to better plan for and mitigate against the impacts of volcanic eruptions.
Advances in science over the past two decades and more have led to significant developments in unravelling processes, the reconstruction of past events and forecasting and modelling of ongoing and future eruptions. Here, we present a new Special Publication book volume open to submissions on the science of tephra. As a collaboration between the Geological Society of London and American Geophysical Union, and led by the IAVCEI Commission on Tephra Hazard Modelling, we welcome research articles related to tephra hazard research and applications. This includes articles related to tephra processes in explosive eruptions, reconstructing eruptive histories using tephra and tephra dispersion, deposition and hazard modelling and forecasting.
Through a volume on the latest research into tephra, we aim to identify the status, gaps and future directions of the science, while collating cutting edge articles that significantly advance our understanding of explosive volcanism.

