# Enhanced global monitoring of volcanic plumes through integration of LEO and GEO retrievals to support volcanic observatories and aviation stakeholders

**Hugues Brenot^1^, Nicolas Theys^1^, Jeroen van Gent^1^, Martina M. Friedrich^1^, Pierre de Buyl^2^, Lieven Clarisse^3^, Nicolas Clerbaux^2^, and Michel Van Roozendael^1^**

<!-- more -->> - **Affiliations:** ^1^Royal Belgian Institute for Space Aeronomy (BIRA-IASB), Brussels, Belgium; ^2^Royal Meteorological Institute of Belgium (KMI-IRM), Brussels, Belgium; ^3^Université Libre de Bruxelles (ULB), Brussels, Belgium

> - **Presentation type:** Poster

> - **Presentation time:** [Friday 16:30 - 18:00](../sessions_comparison.md#__tabbed_4_6), [Room Poster Hall](../maps_venue.md#__tabbed_1_1)

> - **Poster Board Number:** [72](../map_poster_boards.md#friday)

> - **Programme No:** 7.5.20

> - [Theme 7](../theme7.md) > [Session 5](../sessions/session-7-5.md)

--- 

:fontawesome-solid-book: **Abstract**

The effect of volcanic eruptions can cross borders, threatening aviation and local communities. Expanding our understanding of volcanic processes is essential. In this context, satellite datasets are playing a crucial role.
We present our activities, as part of the Belgian Natural hAzards Monitoring from SATellites (NAMSAT) project, aiming at developing a web-based data service and portal dedicated to airborne hazards, providing near-real time access to satellite volcanic plume observations and added-value products.
Our work builds on the SACS early warning system (https://sacs.aeronomie.be), which utilises low Earth orbit (LEO) satellite data to observe and detect aerosols and SO₂. While LEO instruments provide selective detection, their revisit times are limited. The NAMSAT project aims to enhance SACS by incorporating geostationary Earth orbit (GEO) satellite data. Using linear discrimination techniques with spectrum classes to construct covariance matrices, we detect aerosols (ash/dusts or ice crystal) and SO₂ from sensors like FCI (onboard MTG), ABI (onboard GOES-W and GOES-E), and AHI (onboard HIMAWARI-9). This approach enables data delivery within minutes after sensing and leverages the global GEO-Ring (ensemble of GEO-sensors).
This presentation will highlight the added-value products, including time-series of key observations such as SO₂ mass, plume height, and aerosol/ash detection over fixed or user-defined volcanic areas. These products are designed to address the needs of volcanological users, providing timely data for both pre-eruption monitoring and real-time eruption scenarios. Additionally, aviation stakeholders will benefit from enhanced situational awareness enabled by improved GEO-based detection. Recent eruptions are used to demonstrate the capabilities of the NAMSAT service.

