# On the use of dense seismic deployment and data processing at volcanoes; a collaborative effort

**C. Caudron^1^; T. Lecocq^2^;A. Ardid^3^; D. Dempsey^3^; J. Soubestre^4^; M.C. Reiss^5^; B. Taisne^6^; Alec Yates^1^; Laure Brenot^1^; Jonas Patzel^1^; Olivier Fontaine^1^; Lore Vanhoren^1^; Julien Govoorts^1^; Ben Roche^1^; Ovsicori team and IMO team**

<!-- more -->> - **Affiliations:** ^1^Université libre de Bruxelles, Belgium; ^2^Royal Observatory of Belgium; ^3^University of Canterbury; ^4^University of Geneva;^5^University of Mainz; ^6^Nanyang Technological University; Ovsicori (Costa Rica); IMO (Iceland)

> - **Presentation type:** Poster

> - **Presentation time:** [Friday 16:30 - 18:00](../sessions_comparison.md#__tabbed_4_6), [Room Poster Hall](../maps_venue.md#__tabbed_1_1)

> - **Poster Board Number:** [73](../map_poster_boards.md#friday)

> - **Programme No:** 7.5.21

> - [Theme 7](../theme7.md) > [Session 5](../sessions/session-7-5.md)

--- 

:fontawesome-solid-book: **Abstract**

Seismology is the backbone of many volcano monitoring systems. Ground vibrations can be monitored using conventional seismometers, ranging from high-hand broadband instruments to geophones with lower performances but competitive prices. Over the last years, the volcano seismic community has seen tremendous advance in software as well as instrument/technique development. At volcanoes, fiber optic cables interrogated by distributed acoustic sensing have shown promising results providing unprecedented spatial resolution on the seismo-acoustic wavefield radiated, and opening new avenues for volcano monitoring.
We first present recent observations acquired using fiber-based technologies. At various volcanoes (e.g., Laacher See (Germany), Poás (Costa Rica)), we have monitored underwater volcano degassing using both fibers and hydrophone measurements. In Iceland, we have instead deployed or used fibers in the ground to monitor strain variations associated with eruptions in the Reykjanes peninsula (Iceland), or image the shallow subsurface.
The other part of this contribution will review open source softwares that have been developed to monitor the subsurface and tremor using continuous ground vibrations acquired by seismometers and fiber optic cables. We will present the latest developments taking advantage of the MSNoise package to analyse ambient seismic noise, detect subtle changes in the medium, and compute surface wave kernel sensitivity across different frequencies. This software, as well as tremor-dedicated Covseisnet package or other tremor-based forecasters, are now running in real-time at various volcano observatories. We will review their advantages but also challenges, for example the problems of cross-comparison for various volcanoes through WOVOdat that require standardised products.

