# FAIR access to geoscientific data from Iceland on the EPOS Data Portal

**^^Ríkey Júlíusdóttir^^ ^1^, Kristín Vogfjörd^1^, Magnús T. Guðmundsson^2^, María H. Guðmundsdóttir^3^, Þorbjörg Ágústsdóttir^4^, Kjartan A. Jónsson^1^, Hildur M. Friðriksdóttir^1^, Þórdís Högnadóttir^2^**

<!-- more -->> - **Affiliations:** ^1^Icelandic Meteorological Office, Reykjavík, Iceland; ^2^Institute of Earth Sciences, University of Iceland, Reykjavík, Iceland; ^3^Natural Science Institute of Iceland, Garðabær, Iceland; ^4^ÍSOR-Iceland GeoSurvey, Kópavogur, Iceland.

> - **Presentation type:** Talk

> - **Presentation time:** [Friday 16:00 - 16:15](../sessions_comparison.md#__tabbed_4_4), [Room R290](../maps_venue.md#__tabbed_1_1)

> - **Programme No:** 7.5.6

> - [Theme 7](../theme7.md) > [Session 5](../sessions/session-7-5.md)

--- 

:fontawesome-solid-book: **Abstract**

The dynamic environment of Iceland provides a wealth of diverse geoscientific data. In addition to lively earthquake activity and plate spreading, volcanic eruptions occur every 3-5 years on average, often in a glaciogenic environment. By definition, volcanological data is very heterogeneous and close collaboration between different geoscientific fields is therefore vital. The Icelandic Volcano Observatory is hosted at the Icelandic Meteorological Office (IMO), which is responsible for monitoring all natural hazards in Iceland and required to archive and conserve diverse, digitally acquired data that are constantly being collected. The key to understanding and forecasting future natural hazards in Iceland requires stringent checking to ensure research quality of these monitoring data.
In order to enhance future developments of knowledge, IMO joined the ranks with EPOS (the European Plate Observing System) in 2010, taking the first step towards making geoscientific data FAIR. An important milestone for Icelandic participation in EPOS was achieved in 2021 through the national infrastructure project EPOS Iceland (epos-iceland.is), a joint effort of IMO, University of Iceland, Natural Science Institute of Iceland and ISOR-Iceland GeoSurvey. EPOS Iceland is one of six infrastructure projects on the first Icelandic national Research Infrastructure roadmap. The project has enabled FAIR access to data through 18 API services on the EPOS Data Portal and strives to (i) quality check and standardize more geophysical and geological data, (ii) provide FAIR data in open access and (iii) maintain and build more services with long-term FAIR access to high quality, multi-disciplinary geoscientific data from Iceland.

