# Experiences with open volcano monitoring data at GeoNet, Aotearoa New Zealand

**Jonathan B. Hanson^1^, ^^Steven Sherburn^^ ^2^, Yannik Behr^2^, Karen M. Britten^2^, Ery C. Hughes^1^, Paul A. Jarvis^1^, Oliver D. Lamb^2^, Agnes Mazot^2^, Bradley J. Scott^2^, Nico Fournier^2^, Volcano Monitoring Group^1,2^, GeoNet team^1,2^**

<!-- more -->> - **Affiliations:** ^1^ GNS Science Te Pū Ao, 1 Fairway Drive, Lower Hutt, Wellington, Aotearoa New Zealand ^2^ GNS Science Te Pū Ao, Wairakei Research Centre, Private Bag 2000, Taupo, Aotearoa New Zealand

> - **Presentation type:** Poster

> - **Presentation time:** [Friday 16:30 - 18:00](../sessions_comparison.md#__tabbed_4_6), [Room Poster Hall](../maps_venue.md#__tabbed_1_1)

> - **Poster Board Number:** [67](../map_poster_boards.md#friday)

> - **Programme No:** 7.5.16

> - [Theme 7](../theme7.md) > [Session 5](../sessions/session-7-5.md)

--- 

:fontawesome-solid-book: **Abstract**

The GeoNet programme at GNS Science is the primary agency for collecting, managing, and delivering volcano monitoring data in Aotearoa New Zealand. It is also responsible for monitoring and collecting earthquake, landslide, and tsunami data.
Open data (and metadata) principles are at the core of GeoNet.
Volcano datasets include data collected automatically from seismographs, acoustic-infrasound sensors, GNSS receivers, webcams, scanDOAS systems, and a range of environmental sensors, and, data collected manually during fieldwork at volcanoes.
All datasets can be accessed via a web-browser and an API. One in-house developed application (Tilde) delivers most of the low-rate volcano time-series data. Most datasets are also available through the AWS Open Data Program, providing free access to support users wanting large volumes of data, or to develop cloud-based applications.
We actively work to boost FAIR data, and prioritise ease of access in our application design philosophy.
We will discuss our experiences with managing and delivering volcano monitoring data. Including working in a multi-peril environment, managing automatic data vs manual collection, leveraging pre-existing data standards and formats, considering Indigenous data governance in New Zealand, and concerns about possible data mining.
GeoNet volcano data are available at www.geonet.org.nz.

