# Management of the Volcanological Data: An overview

**Giuseppe Puglisi ^(1)^; Benjamin Andrews ^(2)^; Silvia Massaro ^(3)^; Christina Widiwijayanti ^(4)^**

<!-- more -->> - **Affiliations:** ^1^Istituto Nazionale di Geofisica e Vulcanologia, Catania, IT; ^2^Global Volcanism Program, Smithsonian Institution, Washington D.C, USA; ^3^Istituto Nazionale di Geofisica e Vulcanologia, Bologna, IT; ^4^WOVOdat, Earth Observatory of Singapore, Singapore, SG

> - **Presentation type:** Poster

> - **Presentation time:** [Friday 16:30 - 18:00](../sessions_comparison.md#__tabbed_4_6), [Room Poster Hall](../maps_venue.md#__tabbed_1_1)

> - **Poster Board Number:** [70](../map_poster_boards.md#friday)

> - **Programme No:** 7.5.18

> - [Theme 7](../theme7.md) > [Session 5](../sessions/session-7-5.md)

--- 

:fontawesome-solid-book: **Abstract**

Volcanological data are heterogeneous in nature. They come from field observations, ground based and remote sensing instruments, permanent stations or campaign deployments, and include geochemical analyses, geophysical time series, images, video, and other data types. These data are collected, processed, and stored in different formats, with different objectives, with varying levels of support and infrastructure, and are managed by diverse institutions worldwide (observatories, universities, and research institutions). Considering this framework, volcanologists have adopted different approaches and solutions to manage their data. The range of data management solutions reflects the goals with which the data are collected, e.g. scientific monitoring, hazard mitigation/civil protection, research projects.
Technological advancements have added complexity to data management. During recent decades, data acquisition has dramatically increased in both quantity and quality, and previously analog data are now routinely acquired in digital formats, resulting in larger and more complex datasets.  
The implementation of the "Open Science" framework and adherence to the FAIR (Findability, Accessibility, Interoperability, and Reusability) principle pose both technical and policy challenges for enhancing data access within the volcanological community.
This contribution aims to give an overview of the current strategies and best practices adopted by the volcanological community for data management and distribution, as presented in a recent Special Issue of the Bulletin of Volcanology. The topics covered include data standardization and interoperability, data archiving, long term curation, and the various infrastructures supporting science and surveillance activities.

