# Living on the Edge of an Active Volcano: Human Dimensions of Population Exposure to Volcanic Hazards -- Lessons from Goma, Eastern DR Congo

**^^Mafuko Nyandwi B.^^  ^1^; Niang Fall A.^3^; Mani L.^2^**

<!-- more -->> - **Affiliations:** ^1.^ Ecole supérieure de volcanologie, de gestion des risques et des catastrophes, Université de Goma, Democratic Republic of Congo ; ^2.^ Centre for the study of existential risks, University of Cambridge; ^3.^ Université Cheikh Anta Diop

> - **Presentation type:** Talk [Invited]

> - **Presentation time:** [Tuesday 12:55 - 13:10](../sessions_comparison.md#__tabbed_2_5), [Room R380](../maps_venue.md#__tabbed_1_1)

> - **Programme No:** 8.1.4

> - [Theme 8](../theme8.md) > [Session 1](../sessions/session-8-1.md)

--- 

:fontawesome-solid-book: **Abstract**

Volcanic disasters provide valuable opportunities to gain insights and improve disaster risk management. While volcanology traditionally emphasises the physical processes and risk assessment associated with volcanic activity, understanding the societies living on the edge of an active volcano is critical for effective risk assessment. In Goma, Eastern DR Congo, local communities navigate a complex interplay of economic, social, and cultural factors that shape their decision to remain or resettle in high-risk zones, thereby maintaining or increasing their exposure. This presentation examines the drivers that compel people to rebuild on the lava flows from the 2021 Nyiragongo eruption and their adaptive strategies for living in high CO2-prone areas in the Goma region.
The findings show that a strong attachment to land and its accessibility are the primary motivators for returning to the lava flows. Additionally, the need to restore community life and preserve pre-existing communal identity is crucial, as community support significantly aids survival, particularly in areas lacking basic public services. For those living in high CO2 concentration zones, risk perception varies spatially. Residents near marked hazardous areas perceive higher risks compared to those in unmarked zones, despite sometimes similar CO2 concentration. It suggests that awareness campaigns positively influence population behaviour. To mitigate the effects of the gas, low-income households use waste materials to block diffusion, while wealthier residents invest in sealing their properties.
In both scenarios, attachment to Goma, the security and stability it provides are key factors driving habitation in high-risk areas. These insights provide a new perspective on understanding the human dimension of volcanic risk exposure. After an eruption, people tend involuntarily to 'replace' or/and 'increase' their exposure to hazards as long as there is an available living space. Therefore, the development of targeted and effective disaster risk management strategies needs to take into account these human dimensions.

